Alan Bale (Concordia University) & Jessica Coon (McGill University)                                         Saturday 11:45
                        C LASSIFIERS ARE FOR NUMERALS , NOT FOR NOUNS :
                              E VIDENCE FROM M I ’ GMAQ AND C HOL

     Krifka (1995) and Chierchia (1998) provide two very different accounts of the theoretical distinction
 between classifier and non-classifier languages. Chierchia links the distinction to the nominal system:
 non-classifier languages have a mass-count distinction while classifier languages do not. Krifka suggests
 that the difference lies in the the numeral system: classifier languages separate the measure function from
 the numerals whereas non-classifier languages have a measure function incorporated into the numerals.
 To account for languages that optionally use classifiers (as in Western Armenian (WA), Donabédian
 1993), both of these theories need to hypothesize massive ambiguities: Chierchia, ambiguities in
 the nominal system, Krifka in the numeral system. However, if this type of ambiguity is permitted,
 according to these theories, the same type of variation that exists across languages could exist within a
 single language. As a result, the two theories make different predictions with respect to cross-linguistic
 variation: Krifka predicts idiosyncratic behaviour among the numerals, whereas Chierchia’s theory is
 inconsistent with such a pattern.
     This paper brings original data to bear on this question from Chol, a Mayan language spoken
 in southern Mexico, and Mi’gmaq, an Algonquian language of eastern Canada. We show that both
 languages demonstrate idiosyncrasies in the numeral system that are uniquely consistent with Krifka’s
 theory. Furthermore, these results have interesting consequences for the mass-count distinction. As
 discussed in Wilhelm (2008), Krifka’s theory, unlike Chierchia’s, treats the classifier/non-classifier
 distinction as being theoretically independent of the syntactic mass-count distinction. We claim,
 however, that once classifier systems are treated as theoretically separate from the mass-count
 distinction, the mass-count distinction is more accurately described as a division between singular and
 non-singular denotations.
 Nouns vs. Numerals: There are two main theoretical accounts of the contrast between languages with
 a rich classifier system and those without. One, defended by Chierchia (1998), maintains a uniform
 interpretation of the numerals but hypothesizes a difference in the nominal system. According to this
 theory, languages like English have two categories of nouns, one that is directly compatible with numeral
 modification (so-called count nouns) and another that is not (mass nouns). Languages like Mandarin
 have only one category of noun, and this category is not directly compatible with numeral modification.
 Classifiers are needed to convert nouns into a form that can combine with numerals. See (1), where liang
 is Mandarin for ‘two’ and ge is a classifier.
      (1)   Chierchia-like Numerals (simplified)                 (2)   Krifka-like Numerals (simplified)
            Jtwo/liangK = λP : ∀x ∈ P(AT OM(x)).µ# (P) ≥ 2             JtwoK = λP : ∀x ∈ PATOM(x).µ# (P) ≥ 2,
            JgeK is a function from kinds to sets of atoms             JliangK = λmλP.m(P) ≥ 2, JgeK = µ#

 The other theory, defended by Krifka (1995) as well as Wilhelm (2008), hypothesizes that there are two
 different types of numeral interpretations cross-linguistically. There are numerals that have a measure
 function (or individuation function) as part of their semantic interpretations, and those that do not.
 The ones that do not, require the introduction of a syntactically independent measure function, see (2).
 Hence, this type numeral needs to combine with classifiers, whereas the other type does not. As noted
 by Krifka, there is very little evidence internal to English and Mandarin that would favour one theory
 over another.
 Ambiguity: WA presents an interesting case study (Donabédian 1993). Unlike English or Mandarin,
 the presence or absence of a classifier is completely optional. For example, the numeral yergu ‘two’ can
 combine with d@gha ‘boy’ directly, see (3), or via a classifier, see (4).
      (3)   yergu d@gha                                          (4)   yergu had d@gha
            two boy                                                    two CL boy
 If both the noun and numeral have a univocal (unambiguous) interpretation, then neither theory can
 account for this data. However, if ambiguity is permitted, both theories can explain this optionality,
 although via completely different means. Chierchia could hypothesize that the noun d@gha is ambiguous,
 having one meaning that permits the noun to combine directly with numerals and another that requires
 a classifier. Krifka could hypothesize that the numeral yergu is ambiguous, having one meaning that


                                                             1
Alan Bale (Concordia University) & Jessica Coon (McGill University)                          Saturday 11:45
                     C LASSIFIERS ARE FOR NUMERALS , NOT FOR NOUNS :
                           E VIDENCE FROM M I ’ GMAQ AND C HOL

 incorporates a measure/individuation function and another that does not (see Borer 2005 for a similar
 proposal). Data within WA itself, however, does not conclusively favour one theory over the other.
 Chol and Mi’gmaq: Although the noun-centred and numeral-centred analyses largely make the same
 predictions in languages like WA, where classifiers are optional, the two theories make different
 predictions with respect to other languages. For example, the numeral-centred theory would predict the
 possibility of idiosyncratic patterns in the numeral domain, where some numerals incorporate a measure
 function and others do not. The noun-centred theory is inconsistent with such a pattern. Mi’gmaq bears
 out the predictions of the numeral-centred account: numerals 1–5 do not appear with classifiers, while
 numerals 6 and higher must. Compare the forms in (5) and (6): in (5a) the numeral na’n ‘five’ combines
 directly with the noun and even acquires nominal agreement morphology, like other modifiers in the
 language. The classifier te’s is impossible (5b). In contrast, the numeral asugom ‘six’ cannot combine
 directly with a noun (6a) but rather must appear with the classifier te’s (6b).
      (5)   a.     na’n-ijig jinm-ug                     (6)   a.   * asugom-ijig jinm-ug
                   five-AGR man-PL                                    six-AGR     man-PL
            b.   * na’n te’s-ijig jinm-ug                      b.    asugom te’s-ijig jinm-ug
                   five CL - AGR man-PL                              six    CL - AGR man-PL

 Chol is another language that demonstrates idiosyncratic behaviour in the numeral system. Although
 many older speakers still command the full Mayan base-twenty numerical system, Spanish numerals
 are increasingly used among younger speakers. These younger speakers generally know and use Chol
 numerals only for numbers 1–6, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100, and 400, the latter used for counting during the
 corn harvest (Vázquez Álvarez 2011, 180). Otherwise they use number words borrowed from Spanish.
 As shown in (7), the Mayan numerals, like cha` ‘two’, require a classifier (which morphologically
 attaches to the numerals). In contrast, the Spanish-based numerals, like nuebe ‘nine’, cannot be used
 with classifiers, as shown in (8).
      (7)   a.     cha`-p’ej tyumuty                     (8)   a.   * nuebe-p’ej tyumuty
                   two-CL egg                                         nine-CL    egg
            b.   * cha` tyumuty                                b.    nuebe tyumuty
                   two egg                                           nine egg
 To account for the ungrammaticality of forms (5b), (6a), (7b) and (8a), Chierchia’s theory would need
 to hypothesize that nouns in Mi’gmaq and Chol, like jinmug ‘men’ and tyumuty ‘egg’ are ambiguous,
 having one interpretation that requires classifiers and another that does not. However, if these nouns
 are ambiguous in this respect then the ungrammatical forms are unexpected. Under an ambiguity-in-
 nominals account either noun interpretation option should be available.
 Consequences: The numeral systems in Chol and Mi’gmaq provide support for Krifka’s account of
 classifier systems, in which classifiers are required by the numerals, not by the nature of nouns. As noted
 by Wilhelm, Krifka’s account does not depend on there being a syntactic mass-count distinction in the
 nominal system. The need or lack of classifiers instead depends only on whether numerals incorporate
 their measure function or not. Whether the incorporated or unincorporated measure functions require
 their nominal argument to denote a set of atoms (“count”) or a kind (“mass”) relies on the nature of
 measurement, rather than on the presence or absence of classifiers. This brings into question how useful
 it is to identify a language as having or not having a grammatical mass-count distinction in the first
 place. Traditionally, the mass-count distinction was thought to involve a cluster of properties, including
 the distribution of numeral and quasi-numeral quantifiers as well as a contrast between singular and
 plural denotations. We conclude that this distinction instead reduces to whether a noun can be lexically
 interpreted as singular, not to a distinction based on a cluster of properties involving numerals and other
 quantifier distributions.
 Select References: Chierchia, G. 1998. Reference to kinds across languages. NLS 6:339–405. Krifka,
 M. 1995. Common nouns: A contrastive analysis of English and Chinese. In The generic book, 398–411.
 U Chicago Press. Wilhelm, A. 2008. Bare nouns and number in Dëne Su̧łiné. NLS 16:39–68.

                                                     2
