Chapter 22
Beyond one, two, three: Number matters
in classifier languages
Cherry Chit-Yu Lam
The Open University of Hong Kong


       Chinese has been widely recognised as a classic example of a numeral-licensing
       classifier language, where the presence of a classifier is obligatory for overt quan-
       tification of nouns. This paper presents new data from Mandarin and Hong Kong
       Cantonese (HKC) to show that the need of classifiers for quantification is not al-
       ways that absolute. Systematic variation has been found with an extended range of
       numerals examined (numerals larger than three), and a wider coverage of nouns in
       terms of animacy. The findings present a consistent pattern that HKC has a stricter
       requirement for classifiers in enumeration as bare common nouns are not definite
       in HKC, and it lacks the alternative strategies found in Mandarin.


1 Introduction
Chinese, particularly Mandarin, has been an exemplar language with numeral-
licensing classifiers. This paper presents new data from mainland Mandarin and
Hong Kong Cantonese (HKC) which contradicts such a neat understanding.
   It is generally understood that, in Mandarin and HKC, whenever overt quan-
tification is expressed in a noun phrase, whether by quantifiers like jǐ (HKC gei2)
‘some’, or numerals like sān (HKC saam1) ‘three’, a classifier must be present, re-
gardless of mass-count distinction (1–2).

 (1)    Mandarin (Chierchia 1998: 92; Cheng & Sybesma 1999: 519)
        a. liǎng *(zhāng) zhuōzi            b. sān *(píng) jiǔ
           two clf        table                three bottle wine
           ‘two tables’                        ‘three bottles of wine’
            Cherry Chit-Yu Lam. 2020. Beyond one, two, three: Number matters in classi-
            fier languages. In András Bárány, Theresa Biberauer, Jamie Douglas & Sten Vikner
            (eds.), Syntactic architecture and its consequences I: Syntax inside the grammar, 511–525.
            Berlin: Language Science Press. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3972876
Cherry Chit-Yu Lam


 (2) HKC (Sio 2006: 14; Cheng & Sybesma 2005: 272)
     a. saam1 *(bun2) syu1              b. jat1 *(bui1) seoi2
        three clf book                     one cup water
        ‘three books’                      ‘a cup of water’

   This paper focuses only on cases of enumerated common count nouns such as
(1a) and (2a), since measure words are necessary to license the counting of mass
nouns even in non-classifier languages like English. Indeed, measure words such
as those in (1b) and (2b) are termed as “massifiers” in Cheng & Sybesma (1998),
which are different from (count-)classifiers as in the (a) sentences. Massifiers are
there to create a unit of measure, while the count-classifiers, or classifiers in short,
are only there to name the unit of counting which are inherent to the entity it-
self.1 New data present a systematic pattern that the classifier can be optional,
sometimes even disfavoured, in a [num + clf + n] structure when the numeral
size reaches a certain point. Furthermore, HKC has been found much less permis-
sive with this exception than Mandarin. This new pattern challenges the tradi-
tional view (i.a. Krifka 1995; Chierchia 1998; Cheng & Sybesma 1999; 2005; 2012;
Doetjes 1996) that numerals in a classifier language like Chinese obligatorily re-
quire licensing by the classifier; and forms a consistent picture with the general
observation that Cantonese more strictly requires classifiers for individuation
than Mandarin.


2 Beyond one, two, three: A new perspective
2.1 Theoretical background: Krifka (1995) and Chierchia (1998)
Krifka (1995) and Chierchia (1998) offer two classical analyses for Chinese-style
classifier languages, where classifiers license enumeration.2 Krifka suggests that
the presence and absence of (the need for) classifiers is determined by whether
the numerals in the language have a built-in measure function. In Mandarin, he
argues, numerals do not come with such a measure function, hence whether the
  1
    According to Cheng & Sybesma (1998), massifiers can be used with mass and count nouns,
    such as, liǎng bēi shuǐ ‘two glasses of water’ and yī qún niǎo ‘a flock of birds’ – massifiers with
    count nouns have also been known as “group classifiers” as pointed out by a reviewer.
  2
    This numeral-licensing function of Chinese-style classifiers contrasts with the classifier system
    in languages like Japanese (Watanabe 2006), Purepecha (Vázquez-Rojas Maldonado 2012), and
    Niuean (Massam 2009), where numerals are classifier-licensing, i.e. classifiers can only occur
    when a numeral is present. This can be seen in the cases of [clf + n] in argument positions in
    both Cantonese and Mandarin, though the two varieties differ in terms of whether such noun
    phrases can appear as subjects or not (cf. Cheng & Sybesma 1999, Sio 2006).



512
                                                      22 Beyond one, two, three


measuring unit is an “object unit” (OU) – a unit that measures the number of
specimens of a kind, or a “kind unit” (KU) – a unit that measures subspecies, is
left underspecified (Krifka coined that as “object or kind unit” (OKU)). Assuming
that OU or KU can only apply to objects but not kinds, the presence of a clas-
sifier not only specifies which measuring unit is in use, but also generates an
object-referring interpretation for the entity denoted by the noun. The contrary
is true in English. English numerals have this measure function inherently, and
hence can express what [num + clf] does in Mandarin. This distinction in mea-
sure function of numerals has been used to account for typological differences
between classifier and non-classifier languages in Krifka (1995); but Bale & Coon
(2014) has found in Mi’gmaq (Algonquian) and Chol (Mayan) that such a distinc-
tion can appear within a language. In other words, while numerals in different
languages can vary in terms of present/absence of measure function hence pro-
ducing non-classifier and classifier languages respectively, different numerals
within a language can also vary in the same way. In the latter case, some numer-
als can go directly with count nouns, but some cannot. In Mi’gmaq, for instance,
Bale & Coon reported that “numerals 1–5 (along with numerals morphologically
built from 1–5) do not appear with classifiers, while numerals 6 and higher must”
(Bale & Coon 2014: 700), as illustrated in (3–4).

 (3)   Mi’gmaq
       a. na’n-ijig ji’nm-ug
            five-agr man-pl
            ‘five men’
       b. * na’n te’s-ijig ji’nm-ug
            five clf-agr man-pl
 (4)   Mi’gmaq
       a. * asugom-ijig ji’nm-ug
            six-agr       man-pl
       b.   asugom te’s-ijig ji’nm-ug
            six     clf-agr man-pl
            ‘six men’

   On the other hand, Chierchia (1998) explains such difference between Man-
darin and English, or rather classifier and non-classifier languages in general, by
the inherent properties of their nominals. He suggests that all common nouns
in (Mandarin) Chinese are mass nouns; and all mass nouns are inherently plural
(a.k.a. “inherent plurality hypothesis”). Chierchia explains that count nouns are


                                                                               513
Cherry Chit-Yu Lam


inherently singular, and become pluralised when used to refer to a set of singu-
larities. Singular count nouns form singleton sets and are rudimentary building
blocks of all other plural sets (Chierchia termed them atoms). Thus, plural count
nouns denoting a group of singularities are conceptualised as union relations (∪).
To Chierchia, mass nouns are plural-like; only that plural count nouns are sets
formed by union of atoms while mass nouns are “the closure under ∪ of a set
of atoms” (Chierchia 1998: 70). In other words, mass nouns denote an enclosed
union of all sets, and in that way, neutralize the difference between plural (i.e.
sets) and singular (i.e. atoms). Therefore, Chierchia suggests that Mandarin com-
mon nouns provide a neat exemplar for the four mass nouns criteria in (5).

 (5) Mass properties of Chinese nouns (Chierchia 1998: 94)
     a. There is no plural marking.
     b. A numeral can combine with a noun only through a classifier.
     c. There is no definite or indefinite article.
     d. Nouns can occur bare in argument position.

   Focussing mainly on the second property concerning the distribution of nu-
merals and classifiers, empirical data in §2.2 shows that the claim made in (5b) is
too strong to hold. Turning back to Krifka’s alternative, the proposal that the need
for classifier stems from the absence of a measure function in numerals seem
more plausible, especially with the re-interpretation in Bale & Coon (2014). How-
ever, the patterns in Mandarin and HKC are not as clear-cut as that in Mi’gmaq
and Chol, which may pose a challenge to an analysis that is purely along the
lines of Krifka.

2.2 Number size and classifiers
One key observation made from the examples used in existing literature on Chi-
nese classifiers is that most (if not all) examples are confined to the numerals one,
two, and three. This study has examined numerals beyond three. Table 22.1 has
the list of numerals tested; these are all cardinal numbers.
  These nineteen numerals, ranging from 1 to 11000, are used with eight common
count nouns in Mandarin and HKC to form noun phrases which appear as either
subject or object in simple declarative sentences. The eight nouns considered are
presented in Table 2. They vary in terms of degree of animacy (from human to
inanimate) and number of syllables (mono- or disyllabic). (6) and (7) are some
sample sentences.



514
                                                       22 Beyond one, two, three


                            Table 22.1: Chinese numerals

Mandarin          HKC
yī                jat1                    one                              1
liǎng             loeng5                  two                              2
sān               saam1                   three                            3
sì                sei3                    four                             4
wǔ                m5                      five                             5
shí               sap6                    ten                              10
shí-yī            sap6-jat1               ten-one                          11
shí-wǔ            sap6-m5                 ten-five                         15
èr-shí            ji6-sap6                two-ten                          20
èr-shí-yī         ji6-sap6-jat1           two-ten-one                      21
sān-shí           saam1-sap6              three-ten                        30
sān-shí-yī        saam1-sap6-jat1         three-ten-one                    31
sì-shí            sei3-sap6               four-ten                         40
wǔ-shí            m5-sap6                 five-ten                         50
yī-bǎi            jat1-baak3              one-hundred                      100
yī-bǎi-líng-wǔ    jat1-baak3-ling4-m5     one-hundred-zero-five            105
yī-qiān           jat1-cin1               one-thousand                     1000
yī-wàn            jat1-maan6              one-ten.thousand                 10000
yī-wàn-yī-qiān    jat1-maan6-jat1-cin1    one-ten.thousand-one-thousand    11000




           Table 22.2: Chinese nouns: Animacy and phonological size


                 clf         Mandarin                      HKC
[+human]         gè/go3      rén ‘person’                  jan4 ‘person’
                             xuéshēng ‘student’            hok6saang1 ‘student’
[+animate]       zhī/zek3    gǒu ‘dog’                     gau2 ‘dog’
                             lánggǒu ‘wolfhound’           long4gau2 ‘wolfhound’
[−animate]       kē/po1      shù ‘tree’                    syu6 ‘tree’
                             sōngshù ‘pine tree’           cung4syu6 ‘pine tree’
[−animate]       běn/bun2    shū ‘book’                    syu1 ‘book’
                             zìdiǎn ‘dictoinary’           zi6din2 ‘dictoinary’




                                                                               515
Cherry Chit-Yu Lam


 (6) Mandarin
     a. sān-shí-yī     (gè) rén   cānjiā-le bǐsài
        three-ten-one clf person join-pfv competition
        ‘Thirty-one people joined the competition.’
     b. wǒ yāoqǐng-le yī-bǎi        ?/* (ge) xuesheng

        I invite-pfv one-hundred         clf student
        ‘I invited one hundred students.’
 (7) HKC
     a. saap6 *(po1) syu6 sei2-zo2
         ten      clf tree die-pfv
         ‘Ten trees died.’
     b. ngo5 maai5-zo2 ji6-saap6-jat1 *(bun2) zi6din2
         I     buy-pfv two-ten-one       clf dictionary
         ‘I bought twenty-one dictionaries.’

   Regarding the classifier–noun pairings in the study, all the common nouns un-
der investigation are paired with the only appropriate classifier in the language.
In Mandarin gǒu ‘dog’ appears with the classifier zhí (e.g. ten *gè/zhī gǒu), and in
HKC syu6 ‘tree’ with po1 (e.g. saap6 *go3/po1 syu6). The only “exception” is with
the [+human] nouns, as there are two possible classifiers for the noun student –
a general classifier gè/go3 and a specific one wèi/wai2. But for better comparison
with the monosyllabic [+human] noun person, which cannot go with the specific
classifier wèi/wai2, the classifier used for both student and person in this paper is
the general classifier gè/go3.
   In the acceptability judgment task, Mandarin and HKC native speakers3 were
asked to judge the acceptability of these sentences with and without classifiers.
The judgement results have revealed several interesting patterns. First, both Man-
darin and HKC speakers allow the [+human] count noun, person, to take the
  3
      The results reported in this paper are taken from the acceptability judgment questionnaire
      from 2014. Four native Mandarin speakers and four native Hong Kong Cantonese speakers,
      aged 25–30, were consulted. Two of the Mandarin speakers were from Guangdong province,
      and the other two from northern China near Tianjin; samples of both varieties were gender-
      balanced. Participants were asked to rate sentences on a four-point scale (0–3). By comparing
      with control sentences, the scale of acceptability was established (in terms of average score):
      2.8–3.0 = completely acceptable (3), 1.8–2.7 = marginally acceptable (?), 1.3–1.7 = unacceptable
      (?/*), 0.0–1.2 = absolutely unacceptable (*). These terminologies will be consistently adopted
      in this paper. Since little regional variation has been found between southern and northern
      Mandarin speakers, and for the convenience of exposition, the average judgment scores will
      be presented in the text.



516
                                                                    22 Beyond one, two, three


[num + ∅ + n] structure, regardless of the value of the numeral. However, more
precisely, in Mandarin, tested numerals higher than 10 are all rated acceptable
whether in subject or object positions. In HKC, when the noun phrase appears
as object, the numerals have to be greater than 30, but when the noun phrase
appears as subject, only numerals higher than 100 are rated acceptable. All other
sentences with [num + ∅ + person] (as subject or object) are considered margin-
ally acceptable (none completely ill-formed).
   Down the scale of animacy, while HKC has a pattern consistent with the tra-
ditional understanding, i.e. numerals must be licensed by classifiers; Mandarin
speakers allow null-classifier enumeration more liberally, especially with two
sets of numerals. The first set involves high numerals 1000, 10000, and 11000. In
Mandarin, subject noun phrases allow these three numerals to occur without the
mediation of a classifier whenever the noun is animate (object noun phrases re-
quire a human noun).4 Even with nouns of lower animacy, these three numerals
consistently show a higher score in Mandarin null-classifier noun phrases. More
importantly, in Mandarin, the presence of a classifier is not preferred when the
noun rén ‘person’ occurs with these three high numerals: those Mandarin sen-
tences are considered marginally acceptable (2.5 for subject, and 2.0 for object)
when the classifier is present, and completely acceptable (3.0) when it is not.
HKC noun phrases are much more restricted for such exceptions: apart from the
noun jan4 ‘person’, no other nouns can be enumerated without the presence of
a classifier, however large the numeral is.
   One possible explanation for such unmediated quantification could be that the
classifier is still present in the structure but phonologically (partially) covert. An
anonymous reviewer has pointed out that there is often a glottal stop between the
numeral and the noun whenever the classifier is absent, presumably, where the
noun is [+human] and hence the potential classifier would be gè in Mandarin or
go3 in HKC. In the Jin varieties of northern China, for instance, their equivalent
of gè has been reported to have a final glottal stop in addition to the one in the
onset.5 If the same unmediated quantification is found in the Jin varieties, then
what happens there could be that since there are two glottal stops in the classifier
gè, one of them remains as the “residue” of the classifier and licenses the numeral
in the place of the classifier itself.
   However, empirically, the Mandarin and Cantonese speakers consulted in this
study have not displayed such an articulatory feature, and even if it is indeed the
case, the phonological reduction process could only be acting as an additional
  4
      In any case, the noun concerned has to be disyllabic.
  5
      I thank a reviewer for introducing me to the observations in the Jin varieties.



                                                                                          517
Cherry Chit-Yu Lam


trigger for the omission of the classifier when the noun is [+human], but not as a
sufficient condition to account for the selective permissiveness of [num + ∅ + N]
which is shown to be sensitive to animacy and number size. Otherwise, it would
predict that (i) all [+human] nouns allow [num + ∅ + n] regardless of number
size, and (ii) all nouns that can appear with gè/go3 (such as, apple, ball, and other
[−animate] nouns) allow [num + ∅ + n], but neither is empirically true. In fact,
going back to the Mandarin and HKC data, despite the absence of a glottal stop
in the coda position of the classifier gè/go3, there is one in the onset. So, if, as the
phonological reduction hypothesis goes, the glottal stop between the numeral
and the noun can act as a reduced form of the classifier, then the glottal stop in
the onset may work as well as the one in the code position, but as aforementioned,
such an articulatory feature has not been observed and the phonological reduc-
tion hypothesis alone would have overgeneralised the pattern of classifier-less
enumeration in Mandarin and HKC.
   Therefore, the classifier system in the Jin varieties certainly deserves further
investigation, but based on the Mandarin and HKC data so far, a more plausi-
ble explanation for the observed exception is that big numbers like yì qían ‘one
thousand’ and yí wàn ‘ten thousand’, like the English thousands and millions, are
not numerals, but measure words (Lisa Cheng, p.c.). It is indeed the case that a
measure word cannot co-occur with a classifier, as in (8).
 (8)   a. Mandarin
          * wǔ jīn kē cài
            five catty clf vegetable
       b. HKC
          * saap6-jat1 doi6 go3 ping4guo2
            ten-one bag clf apple
   Nevertheless, it is important to note that even though the presence of a classi-
fier may be disfavoured at times, [num + clf + n] is never an unacceptable struc-
ture. In other words, the null-classifier structure is an additional option, but never
the only available option. Therefore, I suggest that these high numerals have an
inherent measure function emerging in Mandarin (à la Krifka 1995), but has not
yet been grammaticalized into a proper measure word. Therefore, when these
high numerals occur, the noun can either be individuated by the measure func-
tion of the numerals and does not require a classifier, or be individuated by the
classifier. The preference for either of the two individuation strategies varies
from one speaker to another.
   Another exception happens with the numeral one. Mandarin speakers consider
direct enumeration marginally acceptable when the count noun is disyllabic and


518
                                                       22 Beyond one, two, three


non-human. More specifically, when the noun phrase is a subject, one can go
directly with any non-human count nouns (the scores range from 2.0 to 2.3); and
when it is an object, the count noun must denote an animal or a plant (both
scored 1.8) but not a completely inanimate object like dictionary (scored 1.3). A
possible explanation for this pattern is that Mandarin is developing an indefinite
article: the slight subject-object asymmetry in the acceptability of [one + n] may
be a sign of this being a still ongoing development. Chierchia (1998) suggests
that the indefinite article is simply a variant for the first numeral, and this is a
well-established grammaticalisation pathway (Heine & Kuteva 2002). Therefore,
what Chierchia predicts for Mandarin – there is “no morpheme that combines
directly with a noun and means what a means in English” (Chierchia 1998: 91) –
may not be correct, since the presence of one without the mediation of a classifier
can be interpreted as an indefinite article (9).

 (9)   Mandarin
       yì sōngshu sǐ-le
       one pine.tree die-pfv
       ‘One/a pine tree died.’

2.3 More than numbers
The data presented in §2.2 boils down to one general conclusion: classifiers can
be optional in licensing a numeral, especially in Mandarin, depending on the
size of the numeral. This observation points to two issues: (i) numeral size can
determine the necessity of classifiers for individuation – one and high numerals
behave differently, and (ii) HKC classifiers are much more obligatory for indi-
viduation than Mandarin classifiers. The first issue has been discussed in the
previous section, thus this section is devoted to discussing the cross-linguistic
variations in the use of classifiers.
   The difference between Mandarin and HKC in permitting [num + ∅ + n] struc-
tures is consistent with a more general pattern that HKC more strictly requires
the presence of classifiers for individuation. Figures 22.1 and 22.2 summarise the
Mandarin and HKC classifier paradigms.
   On the one hand, §2.2 has shown that HKC only allows null-classifier enumer-
ation with the noun jan4 ‘person’ and when the numeral is greater than 100 (for
subject) or 30 (for object); on the other hand, Cheng & Sybesma (1999) have fa-
mously identified that HKC allows [clf + n] as both subject and object, whereas
Mandarin only allows it as object. What appears to be two separate issues, can be
rethought as one if we take another perspective on the second issue. HKC, in fact,



                                                                                519
Cherry Chit-Yu Lam




 PN              Xiǎomíng                              Lǐsī               PN
                 ‘Xiaoming’                            ‘Lisi’
 common noun     láobǎn                                làoshī             common noun
 used as PN      ‘boss’                                ‘teacher’          used as PN
                                      kànjiàn
 CN              mìfēng               see              dàngāo             CN
                 ‘(the) bee’          ‘sees’           ‘(the) cake’
 *clf+n          *zhī mìfēng                           gè dàngāo          clf+n
                  clf bee                              clf cake
                 ‘the bee’                             ‘the/a cake’
 one+clf+n       yì zhī mìfēng                         yī gè dàngāo       one+clf+n
                 one clf bee                           one clf cake
                 ‘a bee’                               ‘a cake’



                         Figure 22.1: Mandarin classifier paradigm



 PN            Siu2ming4                               Daai6man4           PN
               ‘Siuming’                               ‘Daaiman’
 CN used       lou5ban2                                lou5si1             CN used
 as PN         ‘boss’                                  ‘teacher’           as PN
                                        gin3-dou2
                                                       ?                   ?
 *CN           *mat6fong1               see-compl          dan6go1             CN
               ‘bee’                    ‘saw’              ‘cake’
 clf+CN        zak3 mat6fong1                          go3 dan6go1         clf+CN
               clf bee                                 clf cake
               ‘the bee’                               ‘the/a cake’
 one+clf+n     jat1 zak3 mat6fong1                     jat1 go3 dan6go1    one+clf+CN
               one clf bee                             one clf cake
               ‘a bee’                                 ‘a cake’



                           Figure 22.2: HKC classifier paradigm




520
                                                                    22 Beyond one, two, three


does not allow bare common nouns in subject position (mat6fong1 ‘bee’ in Fig-
ure 22.2), except when they act as proper names (lou5ban2 ‘boss’ in Figure 22.2).
Therefore, instead of viewing the second issue as Mandarin disallowing [clf + n]
as subjects, it is more appropriate to see it as HKC requires a classifier for subject
noun phrases with a common count noun. In that case, the two issues are uni-
fied to a general cross-linguistic variation that HKC more obligatorily requires
the presence of a classifier for individuation, regardless of the need for enumer-
ation. To account for this requirement in HKC, Cheng & Sybesma (1999) have
suggested that classifiers express definiteness like the English determiner the,
hence a classifier phrase (clfp) is projected whenever a definite reading arises.
Since they report that both HKC [clf + n]s and Mandarin bare common nouns
have a definite reading, the difference between the HKC strategy and the Man-
darin one is that the former has an overtly articulated clf0 while the latter has an
empty clf0 . In contrast, since bare common nouns in HKC are not definite, the
classifier phrase which encodes definiteness is not projected in HKC bare com-
mon nouns. Therefore, assuming that Chinese requires a definite subject, bare
common nouns cannot be subjects in HKC.
   The issue of referentiality or definiteness can be a plausible explanation for
the [clf + n] and bare noun distinction in HKC and Mandarin, but it does not
provide an answer for the difference in numeral-licensing function of classifiers
in the two Chinese varieties, since both [num + clf + n] and [num + ∅ + n] are
indefinite.6 The answer to this cross-linguistic variation in classifier use can be
found in three related phenomena in Mandarin (none attested in HKC): (i) the
development of one as an indefinite article (see §2.2); (ii) the presence of special
forms for two and three – liǎ ‘two/two of’ and sā ‘three/three of’ (10); (iii) the use
of plural marker -men for animate nouns/noun phrases (11).
  6
      Huang (2015) views this [clf + n] pattern from another perspective: numeral requirement
      (more specifically, one requirement). He interprets that Cantonese allows bare classifier
      phrases in both subject and object positions, Mandarin restricts their occurrences to environ-
      ments with a governing verb or preposition, and generally prohibits them in subject position.
      This observation is captured in the null numeral ‘one’ micro-parameter (i).

       (i)   a. In Mandarin, [one e] is [−strong], triggering Agree with clf.
             b. In Cantonese, [one e] is [+strong], triggering Move of clf.

         In short, Huang claims that Cantonese has a [+strong] number head, and Mandarin a
      [−strong] one. This interpretation of the classifier paradigms is insightful, but still fails to
      capture the new data on null-classifier enumeration presented in this paper.




                                                                                                  521
Cherry Chit-Yu Lam


(10) Mandarin
     a. wǒ-men liǎ / sā (*gè) shì hǎo píngyou
        1pl      two three clf be good friend
        ‘We two/three are good friends.’
     b. liǎ (*kē) shù sǐ-le
        two clf tree die-pfv
        ‘Two trees died.’
(11) Mandarin
     a. xuésheng-men xǐhuan chī miàn
          student-pl      like    eat noodles
          ‘The students like to eat noodles.’
     b. shí-èr gè xuésheng xǐhuan chī miàn
          ten-two clf student like        eat noodles
          ‘Twelve students like to eat noodles.’
     c. * shí-èr gè xuésheng-men xǐhuan chī miàn
          ten-two clf student-pl       like    eat noodles
          intended: ‘Twelve students like to eat noodles.’

   All three developments have one common property: the presence of classi-
fiers become either optional or disallowed. The development of one as indefinite
article in Mandarin allows the classifier to be optional when one appears with
non-human (disyllabic) count nouns. The two special forms for two and three in
Mandarin cannot occur with classifiers, because they themselves mean ‘two of’
and ‘three of’ respectively, meaning that they have inherent measure functions,
just as the three high numerals 1000, 10000, and 11000. Finally, the fact that the
Mandarin plural -men is much more developed than its HKC counterpart (-dei6)
which can only suffix on pronouns, is another piece of evidence showing that
Mandarin enumeration is less dependent on the use of classifiers. However, this
only suggests that plural-marking and classifiers are competing strategies for the
enumeration function, but not that they are morpho-phonological competitors,
as they take up different structural positions. In Mandarin and Cantonese, for
instance, classifiers are in pre-nominal position, while plural markers are post-
nominal. Borer formalises the difference as: “the plural marker is a spell-out of
an abstract head feature 〈div〉 [divided] on a moved N-stem, while the classifier is
an independent f[unction]-morph occurring in the left-periphery of the N” (2005:
95), as represented in (12a,b) below:7
  7
      Adapted from Borer (2005: 95), the open value 〈e〉DIV is the classifier head, and 〈div〉 is the
      plural head feature. The co-superscripts (e.g. max) indicate range assignment relations.


522
                                                      22 Beyond one, two, three


(12)   a. [+clf −pl]                          b. [−clf +pl]

                  clfmax                                  clfmax

           clf2                                   N.〈div2 〉

                              max                                        max
                   〈e2 〉DIV N                                 〈e2 〉DIV N
                                                                         t



  Borer’s explanation suffices for the complementary distribution of classifiers
and plural markers but does not account for differences in the distribution of
Cantonese and Mandarin classifiers.


3 Implications
This paper has presented new empirical data from mainland Mandarin and HKC,
and a new perspective in viewing the classifier paradigms of the two Chinese
varieties, particularly regarding the variation in distribution of bare classifier
phrases in subject position. While previous studies have examined the issue from
the angle of definiteness-encoding (Cheng & Sybesma 1999) – bare nouns vs. bare
classifier phrases, and strength of numeral head (Huang 2015) – numeral phrases
with one vs. bare classifier phrases, neither can account for empirical cases where
classifiers are optional in licensing numerals in Chinese (especially Mandarin).
Therefore, this paper opens a new way to rethink this puzzle by showing (i) how
numeral size, animacy, and phonological size can determine classifier obligatori-
ness, and (ii) three related phenomenon that happened exclusively in Mandarin
which weaken the need for classifiers in its individuation function – one as in-
definite article, special forms for two and three, and plural marker with animate
count nouns. These together should offer a more unified picture for the use of
classifiers in Mandarin and HKC.


Abbreviations
1        first person                     CN       common noun
agr      agreement                        compl    completive aspect
clf      classifier                       HKC      Hong Kong Cantonese



                                                                               523
Cherry Chit-Yu Lam

KU       kind unit                       pfv       perfective
num      numeral
                                         pl        plural
OKU      object or kind unit
OU       object unit                     PN        predicate nominal


References
Bale, Alan & Jessica Coon. 2014. Classifiers are for numerals, not for nouns: Con-
  sequences for the mass/count distinction. Linguistic Inquiry 45(4). 695–707.
  DOI: 10.1162/ling_a_00170.
Borer, Hagit. 2005. The normal course of events (Structuring sense 2). Oxford: Ox-
  ford University Press.
Cheng, Lisa Lai-Shen & Rint Sybesma. 1998. Yi-wan tang, yi-ge tang: Classifiers
  and massifiers. Tsing-Hua Journal of Chinese Studies New Series 28(3). 385–412.
Cheng, Lisa Lai-Shen & Rint Sybesma. 1999. Bare and not-so-bare nouns
  and the structure of NP. Linguistic Inquiry 30(4). 509–542. DOI: 10 . 1162 /
  002438999554192.
Cheng, Lisa Lai-Shen & Rint Sybesma. 2005. Classifiers in four varieties of Chi-
  nese. In Guglielmo Cinque & Richard S. Kayne (eds.), Handbook of comparative
  syntax, 259–292. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cheng, Lisa Lai-Shen & Rint Sybesma. 2012. Classifiers and DP. Linguistic Inquiry
  43(4). 634–650. DOI: 10.1162/ling_a_00109.
Chierchia, Gennaro. 1998. Plurality of mass nouns and the notion of ‘semantic
  parameter’. In Susan Rothstein (ed.), Events and grammar, 53–103. Dordrecht:
  Kluwer.
Doetjes, Jenny. 1996. Mass and count: Syntax or semantics? In Ana Arregui &
  Crit Cremers (eds.), Proceedings of Meaning on the HIL, 34–52. Leiden: HIL.
Heine, Bernd & Tania Kuteva. 2002. World lexicon of grammaticalization. Cam-
  bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Huang, C.-T. James. 2015. On syntactic analyticity and parametric theory. In Au-
  drey Li, Andrew Simpson & Wei-Tien Dylan Tsai (eds.), Chinese syntax in a
  cross-linguistic perspective, 1–48. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Krifka, Manfred. 1995. Common nouns: A contrastive analysis of English and
  Chinese. In Gregory N. Carlson & Francis J. Pelletier (eds.), The generic book,
  398–411. London: University of Chicago Press.
Massam, Diane. 2009. On the separation and relatedness of classifiers, number,
  and individuation in Niuean. Language and Linguistics 10(4). 669–699.
Sio, Joanna U.-S. 2006. Modification and reference in the Chinese nominal. Leiden
  University. (Doctoral dissertation).



524
                                                   22 Beyond one, two, three


Vázquez-Rojas Maldonado, Violeta. 2012. The syntax and semantics of Purepecha
  noun phrases and the mass/count distinction. New York University. (Doctoral
  dissertation).
Watanabe, Akira. 2006. Functional properties of nominals in Japanese. Natural
  Language & Linguistic Theory 24(1). 241–306. DOI: 10.1007/s11049-005-3042-4.




                                                                          525
