                       ARGUMENT MAPPING IN MI’KMAW*
         Arlene Stevens, Yvonne Denny, Barbara Sylliboy, and Dianne Friesen
Ta’n L’nuey Etl-mawlukwatmumk (TLE), Eskasoni Band, TLE, and University of Victoria


This paper demonstrates how arguments are introduced and mapped to grammatical
positions in Mi’kmaw. We build on insights from Piggott (1989), Wiltschko (2014), and
Harley (2017) and use a corpus of over 150 verb stems in 1500+ clauses, focusing on 77
verb stems in bivalent clauses. We propose that Mi’kmaw verb stems are unaccusative or
unergative. Three functional categories, little v, Animacy agreement, and Voice,
introduce the other argument and then map the arguments to grammatical positions. We
illustrate active, passive, and antipassive constructions. This argument-building and
mapping system works without exception throughout the language. Our work represents a
fresh analysis of Mi’kmaw which accounts for transitivity and grammatical voice in a
way that the traditional Bloomfieldian analysis has not.

1.       Methodology

The first three authors of this paper are speakers of Mi’kmaw as their first language and
the fourth is a learner. Our research is done in the context of developing Mi’kmaw
immersion curriculum at the TLE Centre1 and Friesen’s language learning. Our corpus of
77 verb stems is part of a larger study of 150+ verb stems in 1500+ sentences (Friesen, to
appear). The 77 stems are chosen because they occur with little v morphemes -a or -a’ in
bivalent clauses. We elicit as many different sentences as possible with the same verb
stem, focusing our attention on the morphemes between stem and inflection in different
transitivity contexts. We use these as a base for further discussions to investigate the
functions of the morphemes in the verb and how they relate to the participants in the
clause. Specifically, for the 77 stems, we look at combinations of categories and the
authors who are speakers discuss whether each combination is grammatical and what are
the clausal elements. We consider only verbs in present indicative tense (Francis and
Hewson 2016) / realis mood (Inglis 2002). Generative terminology is employed to be
consistent with much Algonquian work.



* We honour the life and work of our colleague Elizabeth Paul Ryan, who passed away in December 2019.
Her expertise and insights as a speaker and teacher of the Mi’kmaw language and as an orthography
consultant are invaluable and she is sorely missed. We are grateful to Friesen’s doctoral committee: Drs.
Leslie Saxon, Heather Bliss, Charlotte Loppie, and Barbara Syllibo y for their guidance, insights, and
encouragement and especially to Dr. Saxon for her input as Friesen’s supervisor. We appreciate the insights
of others who have worked on Mi’kmaw verb morphology, especially Dr. Stephanie Inglis and the McGill
group. This work is partially supported by a SSHRC doctoral fellowship.
1 The TLE is a curriculum-building centre in Eskasoni, Nova Scotia.




Actes du congrès annuel de l’Association canadienne de linguistique 2021.
Proceedings of the 2021 annual conference of the Canadian Linguistic Association.
© 2021 Arlene Stevens, Yvonne Denny, Barbara Sylliboy, and Dianne Friesen
                                                                                           2



         Three factors in our methodology are key to our results. First, we use Indigenous
methodology involving a close collaboration between linguist and speakers as discussed
in Wilson (2007), Czaykowska-Higgins (2009), Leonard and Haynes (2010), and Adams
et al. (2015). Second, we systematically investigate how the three functional categories
(little v, Animacy, and Voice) pattern with a large number of verb stems. Third, we study
the syntax of the verbs in complete clauses. We study transitive and intransitive clauses
that contain the same verb stem.

2.     Findings

We discuss bivalent clauses to limit the study to a manageable size. Section 2.1 discusses
our analysis of three functional categories intervening between the verb stem and the
inflection. Our diagnostics for bivalent clauses are shown in section 2.2. Section 2.3
employs the diagnostics for the presence of an agent to demonstrate unergative and
unaccusative verb classes in Mi’kmaw. Section 2.4 demonstrates that little v selects stems
according to unaccusativity. Section 2.5 uses the diagnostics for valency to demonstrate
that the little v-Animacy agreement combination introduces either an internal or external
argument. The Animacy-Voice combination maps these arguments to grammatical roles
(section 2.6).

2.1     Three functional categories

We parse three functional categories intervening between the verb stem and the
inflection: little v, Animacy agreement, and Voice (cf. Stevens et al. 2021). Our analysis
of three functional categories is in contrast to previous researchers in Mi’kmaw or in
other Algonquian languages. The introduction of the Animacy category as distinct from v
and Voice is suggested by the different manners that the Mi’kmaw verb is parsed by
different researchers, as is illustrated in Table 1.

               Table 1. Parsing of Mi’kmaw verb by different researchers

 Reference                             Parsing                   Gloss
 Inglis (1986:285)          amal-lukw    -at    -m               ‘decorate’
 Fidelholtz (1999:101)      amallukwa-        -tm                ‘decorate up’
 Hamilton (2015:34)         elukw-         -atm         -u-i-t   ‘s/he fixes it for me’
 Our analysis               elukw-     -a -t -m                  ‘I am working [on] it.’

        Inglis (1986) (and McCulloch 2013) follow the Bloomfieldian analysis in treating
-at as one morpheme. Fidelholtz (1999) merges the -a with the verb stem and considers
-tm as being one morpheme. Hamilton (2015, cf. Bruening 2001 for Passamaquoddy)
considers -atm as one morpheme. Our analysis recognises all of these morpheme
boundaries and parses stem-v-Animacy-Voice.
                                                                                         3



       The 77 stems in our study occur with two little v morphemes (-a and -a’), two
Animacy morphemes (-t and -l), and three Voice morphemes (-m, -u, and -eke). Friesen
(to appear) presents the more in-depth analysis.

2.2     Diagnostics for agent and patient arguments

We employ two diagnostics for the presence of an agent: (1) the ability of the intransitive
verb to form an imperative and (2) the grammaticality of the intransitive form with an
agent-oriented preverb. Crosslinguistic evidence shows that agents are invariably mapped
to subject position (Dowty 1979, 1991), which is the position of the external argument.
We assume that if we find evidence for an agent in Mi’kmaw in the intransitive form, we
can conclude that the root is associated with an external argument. If we find no evidence
for an agent, we assume the presence of an internal argument. The first diagnostic, ability
of the intransitive verb to form an imperative, is based on the fact that semantically and
pragmatically, imperatives require an agent, or equivalently under our assumptions, an
external argument. Through this reasoning, it follows that imperatives are diagnostics for
the presence of an external argument. If the imperative form of a particular verb root is
grammatical in its intransitive form, then we conclude that the verb root is associated
with an external argument; if the imperative is ungrammatical, we conclude that it lacks
an external argument. For the second diagnostic, we employ the agentive adverbial
preverb o’pli- ‘wrongly’ again with the intransitive verb. Using the same reasoning as
above, we conclude that roots whose intransitive forms are not grammatical with this
preverb are not associated with an external argument but instead are associated with an
internal argument.
        We use the patient-oriented preverb a’qati- ‘halfway’ as a diagnostic for the
presence of a patient. We apply this diagnostic to antipassive clauses to demonstrate that
they are associated with a patient argument, even though that argument is unspecified in
the clause.
        We determine the valence of clauses using two diagnostics. First, the Mi’kmaw-
speaking coauthors judge the number of participants in each clause. Second, we
determine the presence of an agent by compatibility of the verb with the agentive preverb
o’pli- ‘wrongly.’ Likewise, we determine the presence of a patient argument by
compatibility of the verb with the patientive preverb a’qati- ‘halfway.’

2.3    Mi’kmaw stem classes: unaccusative and unergative

We propose in Sylliboy et al. (in press) that Mi’kmaw verb stems are classified according
to unaccusativity; verb stems are either unaccusative or unergative.
       We review the results from the diagnostics for unergative and unaccusative stems
from our previous work in Sylliboy et al. (in press). Diagnostics show the presence of an
agent with some stems. (1) illustrates the stem wissukw- ‘cook.’ (1a) illustrates the
imperative form and (1b) the intransitive form with the agentive preverb o’pli- ‘wrongly.’
                                                                                                            4



The grammaticality of these forms indicates the presence of an agent according to our
diagnostics in section 2.2.2

(1)     a.       wissukw-a-Ø
                 cook-v-2sIMP
                 ‘Cook!’

        b.       o’pli-wissukw-a-Ø-Ø-y
                 wrongly-cook-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
                 ‘I am wrongly cooking.’

        In contrast, the diagnostics show the absence of an agent with other stems. (2)
illustrates the stem ik- ‘arrive’/’put.’ The imperative form is ungrammatical (2a) and an
intransitive clause is incompatible with the agentive preverb (2b).

(2)     a.       *ik-a’-Ø
                 arrive-v-2sIMP
                 Intended: ‘Arrive!’


        b.       *o’pli-ik-a’-Ø-Ø-y
                 wrongly-arrive-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
                 Intended: ‘I am wrongly arriving.’

       We conclude that the stem wissukw- ‘cook’ is associated with an external
argument and the stem ik- ‘arrive’/’put’ is associated with an internal argument. Our
corpus of 77 stems includes 14 ergative stems and 63 unaccusative stems.

2.4     Little v selects stems according to unaccusativity

The little v morphemes -a and -a’ select stems according to whether the stem is
associated with an external or internal argument. -a selects unergative stems and is
ungrammatical with unaccusative stems. In contrast, -a’ selects unaccusative stems and is
ungrammatical with unergative stems (Table 2).




2
 Abbreviations are: 1 = first person, 3 = third person, 1s>3s = a 1s subject and 3s object, AN = Animate,
IN = inanimate, IMP = imperative, LOC = locative suffix, s = singular, v = little v category.
                                                                                                             5



                      Table 2. -a and -a’ select different stems in bivalent verbs

                          v-Animacy                     Stem class
                                             unergative       unaccusative
                          -a                 ✓                *
                          -a’                *                ✓

           (3) and (4) show two representative examples. 3

(3)        a.        wissukw-a-l-Ø-k                               jakej
                     cook-v-Animacy-Voice-1s>3s                    lobster(AN)
                     ‘I am cooking lobster.’

           b.        *wissukw-a’-l-Ø-k                             jakej
                     cook-v-Animacy-Voice-1s>3s                    lobster(AN)
                     Intended: ‘I am cooking lobster.’

(4)        a.        ik-a’-l-Ø-k                           ila’skw                    pataluti-iktuk
                     arrive-v-Animacy-Voice-1s>3s          card(AN)                   table-LOC
                     ‘I am putting the card on the table.’

           b.        *ik-a-l-Ø-k                           ila’skw                    pataluti-iktuk
                     arrive-v-Animacy-Voice-1s>3s          card(AN)                   table-LOC
                     Intended: ‘I am putting the card on the table.’

      We conclude that the little v morphemes -a and -a’ select stems according to their
unaccusativity.

2.5        Little v-Animacy introduces either an external or internal argument

We demonstrate in Sylliboy et al. (in press) that the Mi’kmaw “final” -at adds an internal
argument to an unergative verb stem and -a’t adds a causer argument to an unaccusative
verb root. Here we reproduce our results, parsing what Sylliboy et al. (in press) presented
as a “final” as the little v-Animacy combinations -a-t and -a’-t.4
      We compare the monovalent (a) and bivalent (b) forms of the unergative stem
wissukw- ‘cook’ in (5).



3
    In (4) some speakers write pataluti and others petawti for ‘table.’ Likewise, for (6b), (8), and (12).
4
  In Sylliboy et al. (in press) we employ the standard Algonquian term “final” to conform to the
terminology in the broader Algonquian literature. Here, we use our more articulated analysis which parses
the Algonquian “final” as two functional categories: little v and Animacy agreement. This parsing is crucial
to understanding the complete picture of argument-building and argument-mapping in Mi’kmaw verbs.
                                                                                                               6



(5)      a.       wissukw-a-Ø-Ø-y
                  cook-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
                  ‘I am cooking.’

         b.       wissukw-a-t-m-Ø                       wius
                  cook-v-Animacy-Voice-1s               meat(IN)
                  ‘I am cooking meat.’

       We conclude that -a-t introduces an internal argument to unergative verb stems. 5
       (6) illustrates the unaccusative pattern with the unaccusative stem ik- ‘arrive’/’put.’

(6)      a.       ik-a’-Ø-Ø-y               jikan-k
                  arrive-v-Animacy-Voice-1s town-LOC
                  ‘I arrive to town.’

         b.       ik-a’-t-u-Ø                   wasuek                     pataluti-iktuk
                  arrive-v-Animacy-Voice-1s flower(IN)                     table-LOC
                  ‘I am putting the flower on the table.’

     We conclude that -a’-t introduces an external (causer) argument to unaccusative
stems. These clauses are prototypical causatives according to the criteria set out by
Zúñiga and Kittilä (2019) (see Sylliboy et al. 2020 and Sylliboy et al. in press for
argumentation).

2.6      Animacy-Voice maps arguments to grammatical roles

We demonstrate in this section that the Animacy-Voice combination expresses
grammatical voice in Mi’kmaw; i.e., how the arguments are mapped to grammatical
roles. We first demonstrate this system in Paul et al. (2019). Argument-mapping in
Mi’kmaw is a straight-forward system where the combination of the Animacy morpheme
with the Voice morpheme yields without exception a particular grammatical voice. We
illustrate active, passive, and antipassive voice. We concentrate on bivalent constructions
and show examples with each stem class.6

5
  We show in Sylliboy et al. (in press) that the Voice morpheme is not involved in the introduction of the
internal argument.
6
  Grammatical voice is the mechanism by which noun phrases are assigned to syntactic positions in the
clause (Gerdts 2011). A prototypical antipassive is defined by Zúñiga and Kittilä (2019:103) as having four
characteristics: (1) the transitivity is one less than a non-antipassive counterpart, (2) the subject corresponds
to the agent-like argument of a bivalent predicate of the non-antipassive, (3) its peripheral or optional
argument corresponds to the patient-like argument of a bivalent predicate of the non-antipassive, and (4) it
is formally coded on the predicate complex. We use the term ‘passive’ to identify a clause in which an
unspecified Agent performs or causes the event expressed by the verb. The prototypical passive has four
features according to Zúñiga and Kittilä (2019:83): (1) the clause has one less grammatical participant than
the active counterpart, (2) the subject of the passive corresponds to the non-subject patient-like argument of
                                                                                                              7



       (7) illustrates the unergative stem wissukw- ‘cook’ in active (a), antipassive (b)
and passive (c) voice.

(7)      a.       wissukw-a-t-m-Ø                      wius
                  cook-v-Animacy-Voice-1s              chair(IN)
                  ‘I am cooking the meat.’

         b.       wissukw-a-t-eke-y
                  cook-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
                  ‘I am cooking [stuff].’

         c.       wissukw-a-l-u-t                jakej
                  cook-v-Animacy-Voice-3s lobster(AN)
                  ‘The lobster is being cooked.’

        -t-m expresses active voice (a). The causer external argument is mapped to subject
and the internal argument is mapped to object. -t-eke expresses antipassive voice. The
causer external argument is mapped to subject and the internal argument is unspecified
(b). -l-u expresses passive voice. The internal argument is mapped to subject and the
causer external argument is unspecified (c).
        (8) illustrates the unaccusative stem ik- ‘arrive’/’put’ in active (a), antipassive (b)
and passive (c) voice.

(8)      a.       ik-a’-t-u-Ø                    kutputi                 pataluti-iktuk
                  arrive-v-Animacy-Voice-1s chair(IN)                    table-LOC
                  ‘I am putting the chair onto the table.’

         b.       ik-a’-t-eke-y
                  arrive-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
                  ‘I am putting [money] down.’ (betting)

         c.       ik-a’-l-u-t                    ila’skw                 pataluti-iktuk
                  clean-v-Animacy-Voice-3s card(AN)                      table-LOC
                  ‘The card is being put on the table.’

        -t-u expresses active voice (a). The causer external argument is mapped to subject
and the internal argument is mapped to object. -t-eke expresses antipassive voice. The
causer external argument is mapped to subject and the internal argument is unspecified
(b). -l-u expresses passive voice. The internal argument is mapped to subject and the
causer external argument is unspecified (c).


the active, (3) a peripheral argument, if present, corresponds to the subject agent-like argument of active
voice, and (4) passivization is formally coded on the predicate complex.
                                                                                                          8



        These are prototypical passive and antipassive constructions according to the
criteria of Zúñiga and Kittilä (2019).
        The antipassive and passive forms are both bivalent according to diagnostics from
section 2.2. First, the Mi’kmaw-speaking coauthors judge that there is one participant in
the clause in (5a) and (6a) from section 2.5 and two participants in the clause in ( 5b) and
(6b) as well as all clauses in (7) and (8) above.
       Second, compatibility with the patientive preverb a’qati- ‘halfway’ indicates
presence of a patient argument in the antipassive and compatibility with the agentive
preverb o’pli- ‘wrongly’ indicates presence of an agent argument in the passive. We
illustrate using both stem classes in (9)-(12). First, we consider the antipassive of the
stem wissukw- ‘cook’ shown in (7b). In this antipassive clause, only the 1s agent is
specified. We need to establish that there is also a patient in the clause. We do it by
showing that we can use the preverb a’qati- ‘halfway’ (9).

(9)      a’qati-wissukw-a-t-eke-y
         halfway-cook-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
         ‘I am halfway cooking [stuff].’

      The coauthors who are Mi’kmaw speakers indicate that they would use this
sentence if they shut off the stove when things are only halfway cooked. Because the
clause is compatible with a’qati-, we know the clause has a patient even though the
patient is unspecified in the clause.7
      The passive shown in (7c) is also compatible with the agentive preverb o’pli-
‘wrongly’ (10).

(10)     o’pli-wissukw-a-l-u-t               jakej
         wrongly-cook-v-Animacy-Voice-3s lobster(AN)
         ‘The lobster is being wrongly cooked.’

      The compatibility implies the presence of an agent. We conclude that both
antipassive and passive clauses are bivalent.
      Similarly, we apply the diagnostics to the antipassive and passive voice clauses
with the unaccusative stem ik- ‘arrive’/’put.’ (11) illustrates that the antipassive is
compatible with the patientive preverb a’qati- ‘halfway.’

(11)     a’qati-ik-a’-t-eke-y
         halfway-cook-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
         ‘I am halfway putting [money] down.’

7
  We thank Martha McGinnis (p.c. June 2021) for her comment during our conference presentation that it
could be that the addition of the preverb a’qati- ‘halfway’ simply means that the goal of cooking is halfway
reached, and not that a patient argument is diagnosed. Further discussions with speakers indicate that using
the monovalent form with past tense/finished aspect is more compatible with the goal o f cooking being
halfway reached, and a patient argument is indeed implied with the antipassive.
                                                                                                            9



      The coauthors who are Mi’kmaw speakers say that the context for (11) is where, for
example, the speaker has 100 dollars and bets 50 of it.8 Because the clause is compatible
with a’qati- ‘halfway,’ we conclude that the clause has a patient even though the patient
is unspecified in the clause.
      The passive is also compatible with the agentive preverb o’pli- ‘wrongly’ (12).

(12)    o’pli-ik-a-l-u-t                     l’mu’j                    pataluti-iktuk
        wrongly-arrive-v-Animacy-Voice-3s dog(AN)                      table-LOC
        ‘The dog is being wrongly put on the table.

      The Mi’kmaw-speaking coauthors indicate that someone might tell them this if the
veterinarian asked them to put their dog on a table and they were putting the dog on the
wrong table. The compatibility with the agentive preverb indicates that the clause has an
agent.
      We conclude that antipassive and passive clauses are bivalent. The Animacy-Voice
combinations -t-u and -t-m express active voice. -t-eke expresses antipassive voice and
-l-u expresses passive voice. Table 3 summarises.

           Table 3. The Animacy-Voice combination expresses grammatical voice

                    Animacy-Voice             Grammatical voice
                    -t-u                      active
                    -t-m                      active
                    -t-eke                    antipassive
                    -l-u                      passive

      There are other active, passive, and antipassive constructions in Mi’kmaw (Friesen
to appear).

3.      Discussion

In this paper we report on 77 stems in Mi’kmaw that occur in bivalent clauses with the
little v morphemes -a and -a’, the Animacy morphemes -t and -l, and the Voice
morphemes -m, -u, and -eke. We find that verb stems are classified as unergative or
unaccusative. The little v morphemes -a and -a’ select these stems according to their
unaccusativity: in bivalent clauses, -a selects unergative stems and -a’ selects
unaccusative stems. The little v-Animacy combination introduces another argument.
-a-t/-a-l introduces an internal argument to a stem that associates with an external
argument. -a’-t/-a’-l introduces a causer external argument to a stem that associates with

8
 With regards to the comment in the previous footnote, an aspectual interpretation is much more difficult
with this stem. There is no idea that the speaker has a goal of betting the entire $100 and so has only
halfway reached that goal.
                                                                                       10



an internal argument. The Animacy-Voice combination maps these arguments to
grammatical roles to yield grammatical voice.
         This argument-building and mapping system works without exception throughout
the language. To illustrate, we show minimal quintuplets from our larger study of 100
verb stems (Friesen to appear) which also includes a larger number of little v, Animacy,
and Voice morphemes. These are bolded in the examples. (13)-(17) illustrate the
unergative stem kes- ‘like’/‘love’ selected by the little v morpheme -a. In each case, the
little v-Animacy combinations -a-t and -a-l add an internal argument. (13) and (14) show
active voice. The Animacy-Voice combinations -t-m and -l-Ø map the external argument
to subject and the internal argument to object.

(13)   kes-a-t-m-Ø                     wasuek
       like-v-Animacy-Voice-1s         flower(IN)
       ‘I like the flower.’

(14)   kes-a-l-Ø-k                mijua’ji’j
       like-v-Animacy-Voice-1s>3s child(AN)
       ‘I like the child.’

       (15) and (16) illustrate antipassive voice. The Animacy-Voice combinations -t-eke
and -l-ue map the external argument to subject and render the internal argument
unspecified.

(15)   kes-a-t-eke-y
       like-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
       ‘I am having an affair.’ (‘I like [stuff]).’

(16)   kes-a-l-ue-y
       like-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
       ‘I like [people].’

      (17) shows passive voice. The Animacy-Voice combination -l-u maps the internal
argument to subject and renders the external argument unspecified.

(17)   kes-a-l-u-t                     mijua’ji’j
       clean-v-Animacy-Voice-3s        child(AN)
       ‘The child is loved.’

        Next, we illustrate a minimal quintuplet using the unaccusative stem kesisp-
‘wash’ selected by the little v morpheme -a’ (18)-(22). In each case, the little v-Animacy
combinations -a’-t and -a’-l add an external (causer) argument. (18) and (19) show active
voice. The Animacy-Voice combinations -t-u and -l-Ø map the external argument to
subject and the internal argument to object.
                                                                                          11



(18)   kesisp-a’-t-u-Ø                        kutputi
       wash-v-Animacy-Voice-1s                chair(IN)
       ‘I am washing the chair.’

(19)   kesisp-a’-l-Ø-k                        l’mu’j
       wash-v-Animacy-Voice-1s>3s             dog(AN)
       ‘I am washing the dog.’

       (20) and (21) illustrate antipassive voice. The Animacy-Voice combinations -t-eke
and -l-ue map the external argument to subject and render the internal argument
unspecified.

(20)   kesisp-a’-t-eke-y
       wash-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
       ‘I am washing [the floor].’

(21)   kesisp-a’-l-ue-y
       wash-v-Animacy-Voice-1s
       ‘I am a person who washes [people].’

      (22) shows passive voice. The Animacy-Voice combination -l-u maps the internal
argument to subject and renders the external argument unspecified.

(22)   kesisp-a’-l-u-t                l’mu’j
       wash-v-Animacy-Voice-3s        dog(AN)
       ‘The dog is being washed.’

        We see that the system of grammatical voice works independently of the stem
class and the little v morpheme.
        Our work builds on and extends previous Algonquian research and represents a
fresh analysis of Mi’kmaw verbs. To our knowledge, we are the first to present
systematic evidence for unaccusativity as the basis for classifying verb stems in the
Algonquian family. In several Algonquian languages, linguists argue that roots are
associated with an argument in intransitive clauses (e.g., Hirose 2003 for Plains Cree,
Ritter and Rosen 2010 for Blackfoot, Brittain and Acton 2014 for Northern East Cree,
Brittain 2014 for Cree-Montagnais-Naskapi, and Tollan and Oxford 2018 for Plains Cree
and Oji-Cree) and Piggott (1989) argues for argument structure in Ojibwe as a feature of
the root. However, these authors and others state that verb stems are classified according
to transitivity and animacy of one of their arguments (AI, II, TA, TI, etc.).
        Our analysis accounts for transitivity and grammatical voice in a way that the
traditional Bloomfieldian analysis has not. Most Algonquianists (cf. Goddard 1974, 1990
for Algonquian in general and Inglis 1986, Fidelholtz 1999, and McCulloch 2013 for
Mi’kmaw/Mi’gmaq) adopt the Bloomfield analysis of verb stem as root/initial-final and
finals as indicators of transitivity and animacy of the object in transitive clauses. This is
                                                                                                     12



in spite of well-documented mismatches between the verb morphology and the syntax
(Wolfart 1973, Dahlstrom 2014, Hamilton 2015, Oxford 2017). Our proposed analysis
illustrates how, without exception, the verbal morphology determines the syntax of
bivalent clauses; that is, the functional categories are syntactic.
        We believe that these findings are only possible because of our methodology
involving a close collaboration between linguist and speakers, a systematic investigation
into how the functional categories pattern with a large number of stems, and our
investigation of the syntax of complete clauses.

4.      Conclusions

We conclude that verb stems in Mi’kmaw are classified as unergative or unaccusative.
The little v-Animacy agreement combination adds an argument and the Animacy-Voice
combination maps those arguments to grammatical roles to yield grammatical voice. The
argument building and argument mapping constructions overlap by both including the
Animacy morpheme. This argument-building and mapping system works without
exception throughout the language. Table 4 illustrates the verb classification and the two
systems for adding and mapping arguments.

           Table 4. Two overlapping systems for adding and mapping arguments

                                         argument building
                      stem               little v Animacy Voice
                                                  argument mapping


                                              References

Adams, Megan S., Christina N. Service, Jennifer Walkus, Jennifer Carpenter, Jess A. Housty, Douglass
          Neasloss, Paul C. Paquet, and Chris T. Darimont. 2015. De-centering the University from
          Community-based Research: a Framework for Engagement between Academic and Indigenous
          Collaborators in Natural Resource and Conservation Research. Toolbox on the Research
          Principles in an Aboriginal Context. Issues in Research Ethics.
Brittain, Julie. 2014. Root semantics as a determinant of syntactic representation: Evidence from Cree-
          Montagnais Naskapi. In Papers of the 42nd Algonquian Conference, ed. J. Randolph Valentine. 34-
          55. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Brittain, Julie and Sara Acton. 2014. The lexicon–syntax interface: Root semantics as an indirect
          determinant of intransitive verb syntax in Cree. International Journal of American Linguistics
          80(4): 475-506.
Bruening, Benjamin. 2001. Syntax at the edge: Cross-clausal phenomena and the syntax of
          Passamaquoddy. Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Czaykowska-Higgins, Ewa. 2009. Research models, community engagement, and linguistic fieldwork:
          Reflections on working within Canadian indigenous communities. Language Documentation and
          Conservation 3(1): 15-50.
Dahlstrom, Amy. 2013. Argument structure of quirky Algonquian verbs. In From quirky case to
          representing space: Papers in honor of Annie Zaenen, ed. Tracy Holloway King and Valeria De
          Paiva. 61-71. Stanford: CSLI.
                                                                                                      13



Dowty, David R. 1979. Word meaning and Montague grammar: The semantics of verbs and times in
          generative semantics and in Montague's Ptq. Volume 7. Springer Science and Business Media.
Dowty, David. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argument selection. Language 67(3): 547-619.
Fidelholtz, James L. 1999. Mi'kmaq transitive verbs and suppletion: Division of transitive verbs into
          transitive animate and transitive inanimate. In Papers of the 30th Algonquian Conference, ed.
          David H. Pentland. 95-107. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba.
Friesen, Dianne. To appear. A grammar of relationship. How Mi’kmaw verbs indicate the relationship
          between participants in a sentence. Doctoral dissertation, University of Victoria.
Francis, Bernie and John Hewson. 2016. The Mi’kmaw grammar of Father Pacifique, New Edition.
          Sydney: Cape Breton University Press.
Gerdts, Donna B. 2010. Voice. In The Cambridge encyclopedia of the Language Sciences, ed. Patrick Colm
          Hogan. 909-911. Cambridge University Press.
Goddard, Ives. 1974. Remarks on the Algonquian independent indicative. International Journal of
          American Linguistics 40(4, Part 1): 317-327.
Goddard, Ives. 1990. Primary and secondary stem derivation in Algonquian. International Journal of
          American Linguistics 56 (4): 449-483.
Hamilton, Michael D. 2015. The syntax of Mi’gmaq: A configurational account. doctoral dissertation,
          McGill University.
Harley, Heidi. 2017. The “bundling” hypothesis and the disparate functions of little v. In The verbal
          domain, ed. Roberta d’Alessandro, Irene Franco, and Angel J. Gallego. 64: 3-28. Oxford: Oxford
          University Press.
Hirose, Tomio. 2003. Origins of predicates: Evidence from Plains Cree. New York: Routledge.
Inglis, Stephanie H. 1986. The fundamentals of Micmac word formation. Master’s thesis, Memorial
          University of Newfoundland.
Inglis, Stephanie H. 2002. Speaker's experience: A study of Mi'kmaq modality. Doctoral dissertation,
          Memorial University of Newfoundland.
Leonard, Wesley Y. and Erin Haynes. 2010. Making “collaboration” collaborative: An examination of
          perspectives that frame linguistic field research. Language Documentation and Conservation 4:
          269-293.
McCulloch, Gretchen. 2013. Verb stem composition in Mi’gmaq. Master’s thesis, McGill University.
Oxford, Will. 2017. Algonquian grammar myths. Toronto Working Papers in Linguistics 39: 1-37.
Paul, Elizabeth, Stevens, Arlene, Denny, Yvonne, Sylliboy, Barbara, and Friesen, Dianne. 2019. Mapping
          argument structure to grammatical roles with Mi'kmaw finals. Paper presented at the 51st
          Algonquian Conference, October 24-27, 2019, McGill University, Montreal.
Piggott, Glyne. 1989. Argument structure and the morphology of the Ojibwa verb. In Theoretical
          perspectives on Native American languages, ed. Donna B. Gerdts and Karin Michelson, 176-208.
          Albany: State University of New York Press.
Ritter, Elizabeth and Sara Thomas Rosen. 2010. Animacy in Blackfoot: Implications for event structure and
          clause structure. In Syntax, lexical semantics and event structure, ed. Malka Rappaport -Hovav,
          Edit Doron, and Ivy Sichel, 124-152. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stevens, Arlene, Denny, Yvonne, Sylliboy, Barbara, and Friesen, Dianne . 2021. Two pluractional
          constructions in Mi'kmaw. In Proceedings of the 2020 annual conference of the Canadian
          Linguistics Society, ed. Angelica Hernández and M. Emma Butterworth, 11pp. Toronto: Canadian
          Linguistic Association. https://cla-acl.artsci.utoronto.ca/actes-2020-proceedings/
Sylliboy, Barbara, Arlene Stevens, Yvonne Denny, and Dianne Friesen. (in press). Causative construction
          in Mi’kmaq. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Algonquian Conference, ed. Monica MacAulay
          and Margaret Noodin, 20pp. Madison WI: University of Wisconsin.
Tollan, Rebecca and Will Oxford. 2018. Voice-less unergatives: Evidence from Algonquian. In
          Proceedings of West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics 35, ed. William G. Bennett, Lindsay
          Hracs, and Dennis Ryan Storoshenko. 399-408. Somerville: Cascadilla Proceedings Project.
Wilson, Shawn. 2007. Guest editorial: what is an Indigenist research paradigm? Canadian Journal of
          Native Education 30(2): 193-195.
                                                                                                  14



Wiltschko, Martina. 2014. The universal structure of categories: Towards a formal typology. Cambridge
        studies in linguistics vol. 142. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wolfart, H. Christoph. 1973. Plains Cree: A grammatical study. Transactions of the American
        Philosophical Society 63 (5): 1-90.
Zúñiga, Fernando, and Seppo Kittilä. 2019. Grammatical voice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
