          A Binary Feature Analysis of Mi’gmaq Number
                           Agreement
                                            Carol-Rose Little

1. Introduction
     This article aims to contribute to the debate on a feature-geometric approach versus a binary feature
approach to number. With data from the Eastern Algonquian language, Mi’gmaq, I argue that the feature
geometry in Harley & Ritter (2002) does not successfully capture the Mi’gmaq singular-dual-plural
agreement pattern. On the other hand, a binary feature approach to number easily allows for a one-to-
one abstract feature-to-morpheme correspondence in Mi’gmaq.
     The data in (1) shows the singular, dual, and plural morphology for the animate intransitive verb
mijj(i)- ‘eat’ in Mi’gmaq. The third person marker is -t as in (1a). Dual is derived from the singular
adding the -ig nonsingular marker to (1a) in (1b) (where -t affricatizes to -j). The plural is derived from
the dual by adding -ulti to the dual form in (1c).

(1)       a. Mijj-i-t.                     b. Mijj-i-j-ig.                     c. Mijj-ulti-j-ig.
             eat-AI-3                         eat-AI-3-PL . AN                    eat-PLU-3-PL . AN
             ‘S/he eats.’ 1                    ‘They (dual) eat.’                  ‘They (plural) eat.’

     I argue that such a pattern is expected under a binary feature account, but not under Harley & Ritter
(2002)’s feature-geometric account. While Harley & Ritter (2002)’s feature geometry predicts complex
dual forms as dual is represented with more features, a complex plural form like in (1c) is unexpected.
In a binary feature system, there is no such prediction: typologically we expect languages to be able
to have morphologically complex dual or plural forms. Thus, a binary feature system can capture the
number pattern in (1).
     This paper is organized as follows. In §2, I describe how the feature geometry and binary
feature approaches formalize the singular-dual-plural distinction. In §3, I present the Mi’gmaq animate
intransitive verbal paradigm that makes the three-way number distinction (§3.1). The data shows that
-ulti appears in plural forms and that the plural is morphologically more complex than the dual. The
Mi’gmaq data poses problems for the feature geometry of Harley & Ritter (2002) where a morpheme-to-
feature correspondence is not possible since complex plural forms are unexpected (§3.2). The Mi’gmaq
data is easily captured in a binary feature feature system by associating morphemes to feature-values
(§3.3). In §4, I extend the binary feature analysis of verbs to account for nouns by showing how to derive
agreement between nouns and verbs in Mi’gmaq. In §5, I summarize my arguments and conclude.




      ∗
       Carol-Rose Little, Cornell University, crl223@cornell.edu. I thank Miloje Despić, Sarah Murray, the 2017
Cornell Spring Syntax Seminar, and the audiences at PLC 41 and WCCFL 35 for comments. Any errors are my
own.
     1
       Mi’gmaq is an Eastern Algonquian language with about 8,000 reported speakers according to a 2011 census. It
is spoken primarily in eastern Canada. All data is written in the Listuguj orthography and any data from the grammar
by Hewson & Francis (1990) has been adapted to the Listuguj orthography for consistency. Other data comes from
the Mi’gmaq Online Dictionary by Haberlin et al. (1997–2017). Listuguj orthography: a – [A]; g – [k]; gw – [kw ];
j – [Ù]; q – [q]; qw – [qw ]; ’ – [@]; V’ – long vowel. Abbreviations: 1 = first person; 2 = second person; 3 = third
person; AI = animate intransitive verb; EXCL = exclusive; IN = inanimate; INCL = inclusive; LOC = locative; PL =
plural; PLU = pluralizer; PROG = progressive; SG = singular; TI = transitive inanimate verb.


© 2018 Carol-Rose Little. Proceedings of the 35th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics,
ed. Wm. G. Bennett et al., 242-250. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings Project.
                                                                                                           243

2. Formal representations of number
    The following sections give an overview of a feature-geometric approach to number (§2.1) and a
binary feature approach to number (§2.2).

2.1. Feature geometry

     Before moving to the formal representation of number in a feature geometry, consider the abstract
feature geometry in (2).

(2)                                                     [A]

                                                     [B]   [D]

                                                     [C]

In this representation, each feature is monovalent and only appears if it has a positive value. So, a
feature like [–C] would not appear in the structure. There is a dependency relationship between features:
[C] implies the existence of [B] and [C] cannot be present if [B] is not present. However, [C] can be
eliminated from the feature geometry without deleting [B].
     Using data from 92 languages and generalizations from language acquisition, Harley & Ritter (2002)
posit a feature geometry to characterize person and number features of the world’s languages. As
this paper concentrates on number, I will focus the I NDIVIDUATION node responsible for representing
singular, dual, and plural. An abbreviated tree extracting the I NDIVITUATION node is given in (3).

(3)                                             I NDIVIDUATION

                                                Group      Minimal

                                                              ...

Harley & Ritter (2002)’s feature-geometric approach to represent singular, dual, and plural is given in
(4).

(4)   a. Singular                           b. Plural                             c. Dual
         I NDIVIDUATION                        I NDIVIDUATION                        I NDIVIDUATION

              Minimal                                Group                           Group     Minimal

Singular is expressed with the activation of the Minimal node under I NDIVIDUATION in (4a) and plural
with the Group node activated in (4b). Dual is expressed as the activation of the nodes Minimal and
Group in (4c). This feature geometry captures Greenberg’s Universal 34: ‘No language has a dual unless
it has a plural’ (Greenberg, 1963:94). Without the node Group, there can be no dual. Thus, dual implies
the existence of a plural.
     Descriptively, it is clear that the dual is more complex than the plural in terms of its features. Indeed,
this helps derive the implication that dual implies plural. Complex plurals would be unexpected in such
a system as the plural is just as complex as the singular (with just one node activated). This is different
than in a binary feature system, which I turn to in the next section.

2.2. Binary features

    A binary feature approach as argued for by Noyer (1992), Harbour (2007, 2011, 2014) and Nevins
(2011), has two binary features, [±singular] and [±augmented], to account for number categories. The
binary feature formalizes the singular, dual, and plural number in (5).
244

(5)       a. Singular = [+singular, –augmented]
          b. Dual = [–singular, –augmented]
          c. Plural = [–singular, +augmented]
          d. The combination [+singular, +augmented] is impossible.

In (5), we see that [–singular] appears in both the dual and plural representations, whereas [+augmented]
occurs only in the representation of the plural. This will become relevant in §3.3, where I posit that
Mi’gmaq morphemes are the spellouts of these feature-values.
     In order to derive Greenberg’s Universal, Nevins (2011) argues for the markedness statements in (6)
and (7). Nevins (2011:421) argues that the marked value of [±singular] is –, given in (6). Furthermore,
in the context of [–singular], the marked value of [±augmented] is –, given in (7).

(6) Context-free markedness statement:                                                         (Nevins, 2011:421)
    The marked value of [± singular] is –.
(7) Context-sensitive markedness representation:
    In the context [–singular], the marked value of [±augmented] is –.

So, plural is more marked than singular because it has a marked feature-value [–singular]. Dual is
more marked than plural because dual contains both the marked value of [–singular] and the feature
[–augmented], which is marked in the context of [–singular], as per (7). Plural and dual are then both
marked with respect to singular because both have the marked feature [–singular].
     The feature [augmented] is always relativized to another feature. In prose, the feature [+augmented]
means that “given some predicate P that is true of some set x, x is [+augmented] if there is a proper
subset of x for which P is also true” (Nevins, 2011:422).2 For instance a set of cardinality such as 20
is [+augmented] for its value of ±singular (i.e., [–singular]) because there is at least one proper subset
of 20 that is also [–singular]. Sets of the cardinality of 1 are always [–augmented] for their value for
[±singular] (i.e., [+singular]) since there is no proper subset of 1 which is also [+singular].
     We can thus account for the dual number, or, sets that have a cardinality of 2. Dual is expressed in a
binary feature system as [–singular, –augmented]. For dual number, there is no proper subset of 2 that is
also [–singular] therefore its feature value for [augmented] is –.
     In sum, a binary feature account uses the binary features [±singular] and [±augmented] to formalize
a three-way singular-dual-plural number distinction. With markedness statements, we can account for
Greenberg’s universal that the presence of dual number implies the existence of plural. In contrast to the
feature geometry in the previous section, the binary feature formalism makes no predictions on which
number we would expect to be more morphologically complex: dual and plural number in the binary
feature number formalism in (5) are represented as being equally complex, each with two feature-values.

3. Mi’gmaq number agreement
     Below, I present data from Mi’gmaq that displays a three-way contrast between singular, dual, and
plural number in animate intransitive verbs. I argue that Harley & Ritter (2002)’s feature geometry
approach does not capture the data as it is not able to accommodate complex plural forms. A binary
feature approach does capture this data easily by corresponding feature-values to morphemes.

3.1. Animate intransitive number morphology
     The relevant data comes from intransitive animate verb agreement patterns in Mi’gmaq.3 Table 1
gives the verbal agreement morphemes for first person exclusive (a), first person inclusive (b), second
person (c), and third person (d). Note that in the orthographic system, the postalveolar affricate [Ù] is
transcribed as j. I use orthographic conventions to exemplify the Mi’gmaq data.


      2
     Its formal definition comes from the work of Noyer (1992) and Harbour (2007).
      3
     Transitive verbs and inanimate intransitive verbs only distinguish between singular/plural. I discuss some other
instances of a three-way number distinction in Mi’gmaq in the conclusion.
                                                                                                                    245

                      Table 1: Number agreement in Mi’gmaq animate intransitive verbs.

                                         Person       Sing.     Dual      Plural
                                    a.   1.EXCL       Ø/-an     -eg       -ulti-eg
                                    b.   1.INCL       —         -’gw      -ulti-’gw
                                    c.   2            -n        -oq       -ulti-oq
                                    d.   3            -t        -j-ig     -ulti-j-ig

Mi’gmaq makes a three-way contrast for number, i.e., singular, dual, and plural. Dual number forms for
first and second persons are formed by adding the nonsingular person ending in the third column. The
third person dual form is fully decomposable into -j (third person) and -ig (animate plural), where the
third person marker -t affricatizes to -j before the animate plural marker -ig. The fourth column shows
that -ulti is then added before person markers and after the verb stem to form the plural.4 Thus, -ulti
consistently derives the plural forms from dual. Table 2 exemplifies forms with the verb teluis(i)- ‘to be
named’. The plural morpheme is bolded and nonsingular morphemes are underlined.

      Table 2: Animate intransitive verb example teluis(i) ‘to be named’ (Hewson & Francis, 1990:46).

                                   Person     Sing.        Dual            Plural
                            a.     1.EXCL       teluisi    teluisi-eg      teluis-ulti-eg
                            b.     1.INCL                  teluisi-’gw     teluis-ulti-’gw
                            c.     2          teluisi-n    teluisi-oq      teluis-ulti-oq
                            d.     3          teluisi-t    teluisi-j-ig    teluis-ulti-j-ig

     Depending on the verb, the pluralizer has the allomorphs -uti, -u’ti or -a’ti, as shown in (8) with
forms from the Mi’gmaq Online Dictionary (MOD). Numbers on the right indicate their entry number
in the MOD.

(8)       a. uti pluralizer
             Eptegw-a’-uti-eg.
             have.freckles- AI - PLU -1. EXCL
             ‘We (plural) have freckles.’                                                                           822
          b. u’ti pluralizer
             Gisu’g-m-u’ti-eg.
             warmly.dressed- TI - PLU -1. EXCL
             ‘We (plural) are warmly dressed.’                                                                    1,538
          c. a’ti pluralizer
             Paqa’l-u-a’ti-eg.
             bite-AI - PLU -1. EXCL
             ‘We (plural) bite.’                                                                                  2,850

I assume that in the context of certain verbs like in (8), the pluralizer’s phonological form changes. In
a Distributed Morphology framework (Halle & Marantz, 1993) this is specified in the Vocabulary.5 For
the rest of this paper, I will refer to the pluralizer morpheme by its allomorph -ulti.
      4
       The dual-plual distinction is an innovation of Eastern Algonquian languages. In other Algonquian languages
the Mi’gmaq dual corresponds to the plural. Historically, the plural marker comes from the Proto-Algonquian
reciprocal marker *-etwi- (Goddard, 1967:9), which is why it attaches so close to the verb stem. The morpheme
-ulti in Mi’gmaq has completely lost its function as a reciprocal marker. Indeed, the reciprocal and the pluralizer
can co-occur.
     5
       Verbs of motion with -a’si or -ie animate intransitive verb suffixes have suppletive forms for dual and plural, as
in (1). However, the singular-dual-plural contrast still remains.
246

3.2. Mi’gmaq number in a feature geometry

     Now let us consider the Mi’gmaq data in Harley & Ritter (2002)’s feature-geometric approach as
outlined in §2.1. Note that although a feature geometry approach was explicitly designed for pronominal
systems, Harley & Ritter (2002) do take some agreement data into consideration. So, I will extend the
system to try to account for the Mi’gmaq verbal agreement.
     Recall the feature-geometric approach representing plural with the node Group activated under
I NDIVIDUATION. I assume that the features under I NDIVIDUATION correspond to nonsingular and
plural morphemes in Mi’gmaq. Recall that -ulti appeared in all plural forms. Group also appears as the
representation for plural in Harley & Ritter (2002)’s feature geometry, so let’s say the feature Group is the
spellout of the plural morpheme -ulti as in (9a). Once we consider the feature-geometric representation
of dual, we encounter problems if Group is associated with -ulti. Dual is represented as the activation
of the features Group and Minimal. If the feature for Group is -ulti then we would expect to see -ulti in
both dual and plural, shown in (9b). However, -ulti only appears in the plural forms, not the dual.

(9)     a. Plural: Group associated with -ulti                       b. Dual – wrongly predicts -ulti in dual
           I NDIVIDUATION                                               I NDIVIDUATION

                  Group                                                   Group     Minimal
                   -ulti                                                   -ulti

    On the other hand, if we associate the Mi’gmaq nonsingular -ig form with Group in (10a), then it
seems unclear how to compose the Mi’gmaq plural forms, which are made up of -ulti plus the nonsingular
endings of the dual, once the node Minimal has been deactivated, shown in (10b). How do we derive the
complex plural when the number of features for plural in a feature geometry are less complex?

(10)     a. Dual                                                     b. Plural — where is -ulti?
           I NDIVIDUATION                                               I NDIVIDUATION

            Group     Minimal                                                   Group
             -ig                                                                 -ig

    Though the feature-geometric approach can capture complex dual forms as dual is formally
represented with more features, the data in Mi’gmaq poses a problem for it. Under a feature-geometric
approach a complex plural form is unexpected given that plural is only represented as the activation
of one node. A feature-geometric approach does not seem to provide a clear path to compositionally
represent Mi’gmaq number morphology.
    In the next section, I argue that a binary feature analysis can better account for the Mi’gmaq number
morphology as we can capture the data by associating each morpheme to a feature-value.

3.3. Mi’gmaq in a binary feature system
     The decomposition of number categories in a binary feature system lends itself to naturally account
for the decomposable Mi’gmaq number morphology.6 I propose the plural morpheme -ulti is the spellout
of the feature-value [+augmented]. This accounts for why -ulti is always present in the plural forms, as
[+augmented] appears in the formal representation of plural. Recall that [–singular] appears in the formal



(1)    Verb of motion ala’si- ‘to go about’                                                                            48
       a. Al-a’si.                            b. Al-a’ti-eg.                       c. Al-’tai-eg.
          about-AI                               about-AI . DU -1. EXCL               about-AI . PLU -1. EXCL
           ‘I am going about.’                   ‘We (dual) are going about.’         ‘We (plural) are going about.’
    6
      Fidelholtz (1968:111) similarly proposes binary features to account for the Mi’gmaq number morphology with
the features [±singular] and [±plural].
                                                                                                                      247

representations of dual and plural. Thus, I propose -ig is the spellout of the feature [–singular] as this
morpheme also appears in both dual and plural forms.7 This is given in (11).

(11) Third person number morphemes in the verbal domain:
     a. /-ig/     ⇔ [–singular]
     b. /-ulti/ ⇔ [+augmented]

     Depending on person features, [–singular] has different spellouts. In the context of second person
[–singular] is -oq, in first person exclusive -eg and so on. As both dual and plural forms in a binary
feature system both have the feature-value [–singular], this accounts for why nonsingular endings appear
in both dual and plural forms in Mi’gmaq. The feature-value [–augmented] is not associated with any
morpheme.8
     In brief, each morpheme in Mi’gmaq number agreement corresponds to an abstract feature-value
in the binary system, with variations happening only in the context of person. By associating abstract
features with morphemes, we can derive the verbal agreement pattern in Table 1.
     A language like Mi’gmaq is expected under a binary approach where the number system does not
have a morpheme [–augmented] with which [–singular] would give dual. Rather, the language has a
morpheme for [+augmented] with which [–singular] gives you plural. A binary feature system is able to
capture a wide range of typological patterns. To this end, it can easily capture the complex plural forms
in Mi’gmaq.

4. Deriving agreement: Nouns in Mi’gmaq
     In this section, I extend the binary analysis of verbs to account for nouns. In most nouns -ulti, never
appears. The phonetic forms of most nouns distinguish singular from nonsingular. How this works with
verbal agreement is shown in (12) and (13). Bare nouns are interpreted as singular in (12), whereas -g
suffix marks nonsingular on nouns in (13). The noun ‘girls’ in both dual and plural forms is epite’ji’j-g.
Here the allomorph of -ulti for the verb dance is realized as -alti.9

(12) E’pite’ji’j amalg-a-t.
     girl        dance-AI-3
     ‘The girl dances.’

(13)    a. E’pite’ji’j-g amalg-a-j-ig.                            b. E’pite’ji’j-g amalg-alti-j-ig.
           girl-PL . AN dance-AI-3-PL . AN                           girl-PL . AN dance-PLU-3-PL . AN
           ‘The girls (dual) dance.’                                 ‘The girls (plural) dance.’

     For the noun, I posit that the feature-value [+singular] is not associated with any morpheme (as in
the bare noun in (12)). The feature-value [–singular] in the context of the animate noun e’pite’ji’j ‘girl’
in (13) is the spellout of the animate plural morpheme -g. The [–singular] feature -g in nouns is, as
expected, morpho-phonologically very similar to -ig in (11a).10
     As for agreement, following a Distributed Morphology model of grammar (Halle & Marantz, 1993),
we can assume that in nouns the feature [augmented] is impoverished, or deleted postsyntactically,
accounting for why -ulti (allomorphically -alti) does not appear. Following Chomsky (2000) and
Chomsky (2001), I take agreement morphemes to be the result of an Agree relation between a probe

     7
       Hamilton (2015:35) has suggested that -ig is a clitic due to its attachment position in the final slot in the verbal
morphology and that it is not subject to the same locality restrictions as other morphemes in the verbal spine.
     8
       The feature [+singular] is always null. This explains why we see the third person morpheme -t in singular, dual,
and plural. The presence of [+singular] can affect the spellouts of person features. This accounts for why second
person singular is spelled out as -n when [+singular] is present. On the other hand, the feature [–singular] is not null
(e.g., -ig) but it can be affected by other features like person.
     9
       Coon & Bale (2014) report the allomorph of the pluralizer to be -a’ti for the verb ‘dance’. The lengthened a’ is
likely a process whereby the [l] of the pluralizer -alti deletes then there is compensatory lengthening of the vowel.
    10
       Nouns in Mi’gmaq are either of the animate or inanimate gender. In the context of an inanimate noun, the
spellout of [–singular] would be -l as in mutputi-l ‘chairs’.
248

with unvalued φ features and a goal (an NP or DP) with valued φ features. I schematize how agreement
works for example (13b) below in (14). Agreement occurs prior to feature deletion so a verb with
unvalued [singular] and [augmented] features can agree with the plural noun in (14a) that has valued
[singular] and [augmented] features. After agreement, the [augmented] feature is deleted before any
phonetic content gets inserted in (14b). Then phonetic content is inserted in (14c).

(14) Deriving agreement in (13b)
     a. Agree occurs prior to feature deletion
         GIRL    [–singular ] [+augmented]             DANCE      [ singular]    [ augmented]


      b. [augmented] feature is impoverished on the noun
           GIRL  [–singular ] [+augmented]          DANCE         [–singular]   [+augmented]

      c. Spellout/Vocabulary Insertion
         e’pite’ji’j-g amalg-alti-j-ig

Only the feature [singular] gets spelled out on the noun, while both [singular] and [augmented] features
are spelled out on the verb. Thus, the pluralizer (bolded in (14c)) appears on the verb but not the noun.
In sum, by impoverishing the feature [augmented] on nouns, we can account for agreement.

5. Summary and conclusions
     In Mi’gmaq nonsingular endings appear in both dual and plural forms. The plural is derived from
the dual by adding a pluralizing morpheme, -ulti. Thus, the plural is morphologically more complex than
the dual. A complex plural form is unexpected under Harley & Ritter (2002)’s feature geometry as the
plural is formally represented as being less complex (i.e, less features) than the dual. There is no simple
way to parsimoniously associate features in Harley & Ritter (2002)’s feature geometry to morphemes in
Mi’gmaq that would derive the Mi’gmaq agreement pattern.
     In a binary feature system, plural is represented as [–singular, +augmented]. By associating the
plural morpheme -ulti with the feature-value [+augmented], the system can capture the existence of -ulti
in the plural forms, while excluding it in dual forms, as the value for [augmented] in dual forms is –.
Both dual and plural have the [–singular], so by associating the nonsingular morphemes in Mi’gmaq
with [–singular] we account for their appearances in both dual and plural forms.
     I also extended the binary feature system to nouns and agreement in Mi’gmaq. In other parts of the
language, like in most nouns, there is only a two-way distinction spelled out: singular and plural. In
these contexts since the plural morpheme does not appear, the [augmented] feature is impoverished, or
deleted postsyntactically, after agreement.
     It might be tempting to argue for a lexical analysis of the -ulti pluralizer where it only attaches
to animate intransitive verbs (AI). This seems to be inconsistent with some empirical facts in both the
verbal and nominal domains.
     Firstly, there are other verbs that are not animate intransitive that make a three-way number
distinction. For instance, some verbs that do not have an animate intransitive verbal suffix do show
a three-way contrast. These are the so-called “objectless transitive inanimate verbs”, or, TI - O. These
verbs have a transitive inanimate verbal suffix (glossed as TI) but do not allow any arguments in object
position. An example with the TI - O verb ewistu- ‘talk’ is given in (15).

(15) An example of a TI - O which displays a three-way number contrast                                 890

      a. Etl-ewis-tu.                  b. Etl-ewis-tu-eg.               c. Etl-ewis-tu-’ti-eg.
         PROG -talk- TI                   PROG -talk- TI-1. EXCL           PROG -talk- TI- PLU -1. EXCL
         ‘I am talking.’                  ‘We (dual) are talking.’         ‘We (plural) are talking.’
                                                                                                           249

      Some verbs that do not have object agreement but can take objects also make a three way contrast.
The verb a’sisege- ‘throw over’ makes a three way contrast (a’sisegei ‘I throw it over’, a’sisegei-eg
‘we (dual) throw it over’, a’siseg-a’ti-eg ‘we (plural) throw it over’). In shape it looks like an animate
intransitive verb (i.e., it has an animate intransitive verbal suffix, glossed as AI in (16)). However, it can
still take an overt object as the example in (16) shows.

(16) A’sis-ege-t     a’gusn llutaqan-igtug.
     throw.over-AI-3 hat     fence-LOC
    ‘He throws the hat over the fence.’                                                                   394

Under a lexical analysis, it would be difficult to account for all these instances of -ulti attaching to a
variety of verbs. Under the binary feature analysis presented here, the augmented feature is simply
spelled out in these cases, rather than impoverished.
     Secondly in the nominal domain, some nouns listed in the MOD, mainly those denoting professions
with the prefix nuji-/nut ‘skilled in’, make a three-way number contrast as in Table (3).

   Table 3: Examples of nouns in the MOD that make a three-way contrast in number in Mi’gmaq.

                    Singular         Dual                 Plural
                    nujiputaqiget    nujiputaqigej-ig     nujiputaq-ati-j-ig    ‘butcher’
                    nutanteget       nutantegej-ig        nutantaq-ati-j-ig     ‘hunter’


Though these nouns look like verbs in some respects (the -t third person suffix, for instance), they can
function as nouns. The example in (17) shows that nujiputaqiget ‘butcher’ is the subject of the verb
pegisin- ‘arrive’.

(17) Nujiputaqiget pegi-sin-g gisgug. . .
     butcher        arrive-AI-3 today
    ‘The butcher is here today. . . ’

     Under a lexical account where -ulti only attaches to verbs, it would be difficult to include the data in
Table 3, which provides evidence that some nouns make the three-way number distinction. I posit that
the feature [augmented] is not impoverished for the cases in Table 3.
     These data thus show that a three-way number distinction is attested in verbs other than animate
intransitive verbs and in some nouns. Under a lexical analysis of -ulti attaching to just animate
intransitive verbs, it would be difficult to account for these other pieces of data. Under a binary feature
system, the feature [augmented] is simply spelled out for these cases rather than impoverished.
     To conclude, I make a final note on markedness. Using typological evidence on markedness,
Nevins (2011) argues that plural is more marked than singular, but plural is unmarked apropos dual.
By markedness, he refers to morphological markedness, rather than semantic. Under the framework of
Distributed Morphology (Halle & Marantz, 1993), Nevins (2011) states that it is possible to separate
featural markedness from how the language phonetically realizes the abstract feature terminals. So,
though a phonological exponent may look more marked (additional morphemes, for example) this does
not mean that the form is marked in terms of its features. In order to construct dual forms, two binary
features are needed, namely [±augmented] and [±singular]. This allows for a singular-dual-plural
number distinction. Although morphological dual number in Mi’gmaq has less morphemes, the fact
that another feature is needed to make a three-way contrast with number makes the existence of dual, in
a formal sense, more marked than plural. This follows from Nevins (2011) description of markedness
being abstract featural markedness which does not necessarily correlate to phonological exponents.11
Thus, it is important not to conflate abstract markedness and the markedness of phonological exponents
in the Vocabulary.

  11
     Milačić (2016) comes to a different conclusion. Comparing complex dual forms in Manam (Austronesian) and
Mi’gmaq complex plural forms, he equates phonological exponents with markedness.
250

     What part of the language displays the more marked pattern is subject to language-dependent
variation. Mi’gmaq is not the only language where the plural is derived from the dual form. Hopi
(Uto-Aztecan) also has complex plurals that can be seen on nominal morphology in Table 4.

Table 4: Some Hopi nouns make a three-way contrast in number with plural derived from dual. Data
from Hale (1997:73).

                                   Singular    Dual        Plural
                                   taaqa       taaqa-t     tàataq-t   ‘man’


This tells us that, crosslinguistically, whether nouns or verbs in a language display the more marked
pattern is subject to parametric variation. It is my hope that empirical insights from understudied
languages can further our development of morphological theories of number.

References
Chomsky, Noam (2000). Minimalist inquiries: The framework. Roger Martin, David Michaels & Juan Uriagereka
     (eds.), Step by step: Essays on minimalist syntax in honor of Howard Lasnik, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
     89–155.
Chomsky, Noam (2001). Derivation by phase. Kenstowicz, Michael (ed.), Ken Hale: A Life in Language,
     Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1–52.
Coon, Jessica & Alan Bale (2014). The interaction of person and number in Mi’gmaq. Nordlyd 41:1, 85–101.
Fidelholtz, James Lawrence (1968). Micmac morphophonemics. PhD thesis, MIT, Cambridge, MA.
Goddard, Ives (1967). Notes on the genetic classification of the Algonquian languages. DeBlois, A. D. (ed.),
     Proceedings of the 1st Algonquian Conference, National Museum of Canada, Ottawa, 7–12.
Greenberg, Joseph H (1963). Some universals of grammar with particular reference to the order of meaningful
     elements. Universals of language 2, 73–113.
Haberlin, Sean, Eunice Metallic, Diane Mitchell, Watson Williams, Joe Wilmot & Dave Ziegler (eds.) (1997–2017).
     Mi’gmaq-Mi’kmaq Online Dictionary. https://www.mikmaqonline.org/.
Hale, Ken (1997). Some observations on the contributions of local languages to linguistic science. Lingua 100:1-4,
     71–89.
Halle, Morris & Alec Marantz (1993). Distributed Morphology and the pieces of inflection. Hale, Kenneth &
     Samuel J. Keyser (eds.), The View From Building 20, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hamilton, Michael (2015). The syntax of Mi’gmaq: A configurational account. PhD thesis, McGill University,
     Montreal.
Harbour, Daniel (2007). Morphosemantic Number: From Kiowa Noun Classes to UG Number Features. Springer,
     Dordrecht.
Harbour, Daniel (2011). Valence and atomic number. Linguistic inquiry 42:4, 561–594.
Harbour, Daniel (2014). Paucity, abundance, and the theory of number. Language 90:1, 185–229.
Harley, H. & E. Ritter (2002). Person and number in pronouns: A feature-geometric analysis. Language 78:3, 482–
     526.
Hewson, John & Bernie Francis (1990). The Micmac grammar of Father Pacifique: Translated and retranscribed by
     John Hewson and Bernard Francis. Algonquian and Iroquoian Linguistics Memoir 1.
Milačić, Dejan (2016). Two types of dual number. Talk given at Chicago Linguistic Society (CLS) 52.
Nevins, A. (2011). Marked targets versus marked triggers and impoverishment of the dual. Linguistic Inquiry 42:3,
     413–444.
Noyer, Robert Rolf (1992). Features, positions and affixes in autonomous morphological structure. PhD thesis,
     Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Proceedings of the 35th West Coast
Conference on Formal Linguistics
edited by Wm. G. Bennett, Lindsay Hracs,
and Dennis Ryan Storoshenko
Cascadilla Proceedings Project               Somerville, MA            2018




Copyright information
Proceedings of the 35th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics
© 2018 Cascadilla Proceedings Project, Somerville, MA. All rights reserved
ISBN 978-1-57473-472-0 library binding

A copyright notice for each paper is located at the bottom of the first page of the paper.
Reprints for course packs can be authorized by Cascadilla Proceedings Project.


Ordering information
Orders for the library binding edition are handled by Cascadilla Press.
To place an order, go to www.lingref.com or contact:

Cascadilla Press, P.O. Box 440355, Somerville, MA 02144, USA
phone: 1-617-776-2370, fax: 1-617-776-2271, sales@cascadilla.com


Web access and citation information
This entire proceedings can also be viewed on the web at www.lingref.com. Each paper has a unique document #
which can be added to citations to facilitate access. The document # should not replace the full citation.

This paper can be cited as:

Little, Carol-Rose. 2018. A Binary Feature Analysis of Mi’gmaq Number Agreement. In Proceedings of the 35th
West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, ed. Wm. G. Bennett et al., 242-250. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Proceedings Project. www.lingref.com, document #3395.
